# CHARACTER CLASSES (MONK)

I. At 11th and higher levels of experience monks are not affected by poison of any type.

J. Geas and quest spells have no effect upon monks of 12th or higher level.

K. The last ability gained, and perhaps the most terrible power, is that fabled attack which enables the monk to set up vibrations in the body of the victim, and the monk can then control such vibrations so as to cause death to occur when the monk stops them. Known as the “quivering palm”, the monk merely touches his victim to set up the deadly vibrations. This power is limited as follows:

1. It can be attempted but once per week, and the monk must touch the intended victim within 3 melee rounds or the power is drained for one week.

2. It has no affect on the undead or creatures which can be hit only by magical weaponry.

3. The victim cannot have more hit dice than the monk using the power, and in any event, the total hit points of the victim cannot exceed those of the monk by more than 200%, or the power has no effect.

4. The command to die (the control of the vibrations) must be given by the monk within a set time limit, or else the vibrations simply cease of their own accord and do no damage whatsoever. The time limit of death command is one day per level of experience the monk has gained at the time the power is used.

There are a number of strictures which monk characters must abide by. These restrictions apply to 1) armor and weapons, 2) treasure, 3) magic items usable, 4) strength ability adjustments, 5) henchmen, and 6) advancement in level, as follows:

1. Armor, as previously stated, cannot be worn. Weapons usable by monk characters are shown on CHARACTER CLASSES TABLE II; weapons not listed cannot be used.

2. Monks, much like paladins (q.v.), may not retain more than a small fraction of whatever treasure they gain. A monk may possess no more than two magic weapons and three other magic items (see 3 below) at any time. While monks may retain money sufficient for their modest needs, and to support their henchmen (see 5 below), all other treasure and excess magic items must be bestowed upon (non player) religious institutions. (See also Followers hereafter.)

3. Magic items usable by monks include all magical varieties of weapons listed (unless proscribed), rings, and those miscellaneous magic items which are usable by thieves. No other magic items of any sort may be employed by monks.

4. Monks do not gain any bonuses, either with respect to increasing “to hit” probability or to increase hit points of damage, for strength ability.

5. Until attaining the rank of Master, monks may not have any hirelings or henchmen at all. At 6th level of experience, monks may hire persons on a short-duration basis — for the duration of a single adventure only. At this level, they may also acquire up to two henchmen. Henchmen may be fighters (but not paladins nor rangers), thieves, or assassins. With each level of experience above the 6th which the monk attains, he or she may add one additional henchman, until the maximum number established by the monk’s charisma score is reached. Monks will gain followers upon attaining 8th level; this is discussed hereafter.

6. There can be only a limited number of monks above 7th level (Superior Master). There are three 8th level (Master of Dragons) and but one of each higher level. When a player character monk gains sufficient experience points to qualify him or her for 8th level, the commensurate abilities are attained only temporarily. The monk must find and defeat in single combat, hand-to-hand, without weapons or magic items, one of the 8th level monks — the White, the Green, or the Red. The same must be done at the ninth and higher levels. The

# CHARACTER CLASSES (MULTI-CLASSES)

loser of these combats loses enough experience points to place him or her at the lowest number possible to attain the level just beneath the new level. The monk character will know where to locate the higher level monks; and he or she must proceed immediately to do combat or else lose experience points equal to the number which will place him or her at the lowest number possible to have attained the level just beneath that of the monk he or she should have sought out but did not. That is, the player character drops to 7th level in the above case and must then work upwards once again.

Followers: When a monk player character attains the 8th level of experience, he or she will gain a number of monks as followers upon defeating the monk which held the 8th level position that the player character has now gotten. He or she will attract from 2-5 1st level monks if the player character has a monastery or monastery-like building to use as a headquarters. These followers may be worked upwards in levels of experience. The player character will attract 1 or 2 additional monks of 1st level for each additional level of experience the player gains.

While followers of a monk are as loyal as his or her other henchmen, they automatically leave service when they attain the level of Superior Master (7th).

All followers will be of the exact same alignment as the monk player character. If he or she changes alignment, the current followers will desert, but new ones can still be gained by advancement in level.

The monastery or monastery-like headquarters of the monk can be that of the character he or she defeated to attain 8th or higher level, or it can be a building specially constructed by the monk player character after attaining 8th or higher level. In the latter case, the monk may retain up to 250,000 gold pieces value in treasure in order to finance construction of the place. He or she may also retain sufficient funds thereafter to maintain such a place.

Note that monk followers require no support, upkeep, or pay of any sort.

## The Multi-Classed Character

The game assumes that only non- or semi-human characters can be multi-classed, and only certain class combinations are possible, depending on the race of the character. Although these are listed in the section dealing with each race of character, multi-class character possibilities are also shown below in order to aid in selection of your character’s class or multi-class. Cleric combinations (with fighter types) may use edged weapons.

Cleric/Fighter: This combination is strong in defensive and revitalization capabilities, plus the offensive missile and melee combat power of the fighter. Hit points average will be good. Half-elves and half-orcs may be cleric/fighters.

Cleric/Fighter/Magic-user: One of the best of the multi-class options, this gives good offensive and defensive spell capability plus the fighter’s melee combat strength. Half-elves may be cleric/fighter/magic-users.

Cleric/Ranger: See cleric/fighter above. This combination is potent in outdoor situations as well. Half-elves may be cleric/rangers.

Cleric/Magic-user: This combination gives the character a great variety and selection of spells, as well as the use of armor and more weapons. Hit points are somewhat better than those of the magic-user class alone. Half-elves may be cleric/magic-users.

Cleric/Thief: This is a combination of classes which gives both defensive and stealth potential. Hit points are improved with regard to the thief class only. As with all thief class combinations, however, any functions as a thief are under the restrictions of that class with regard to armor, i.e. only leather armor and no shield. Half-orcs may be cleric/thieves.

Cleric/Assassin: Seemingly strange, this combination is quite understandable when the race which can operate in these two classes at the same time is noted. The combination gives great potential in defensive and stealth situations and very powerful assassination attack capabilities. Hit points are good because of clerical hit dice. Half-orcs may be clerical assassins.

Fighter/Magic-user: Obviously, this combination allows excellent armor

32
