# PSIONICS

## Area of Effect: One level/hit die per level of mastery cumulative

**Explanation/Description:** This discipline is similar to suggestion and charm person/charm monster spells (qq.v.) It affects only creatures with intelligence greater than 7 and less than 17, i.e. the stupid and unusually bright are not subject to hypnosis. By employing this discipline, the psionic is able to instruct the creature as to a course of action which seems reasonable — no orders to kill self, friends, associates, etc. — and plant a post-hypnotic suggestion as well, the latter having a 5% per day cumulative chance of wearing off and not affecting the creature in whose mind it was implanted. Hypnosis affects 1 level or hit die of creatures per level of mastery of the possessor. Thus at 1st level of mastery but a single 1st level character or monster with up to 1 hit die can be hypnotized; but at 2nd level 2 additional effect levels are added, so up to 3 levels/hit dice can be hypnotized:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Level of Mastery</th>
    <th>Levels/Hit Dice Affected</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>first</td>
    <td>1 = 1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>second</td>
    <td>1 + 2 = 3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>third</td>
    <td>1 + 2 + 3 = 6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fourth</td>
    <td>1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fifth</td>
    <td>1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 = 15</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>...etc.</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

The strength point cost is 1 per level/hit die hypnotized. Creatures with 15 or 16 intelligence or over 10th level/10 hit dice are entitled to a saving throw versus magic; if it is successful, the hypnosis has no effect.

## Invisibility

**Range:** 0  
**Duration:** 1 turn/expenditure  
**Area of Effect:** One level/hit die per level of mastery cumulative  
**Strength Point Cost:** 3/turn  
**Saving Throw:** None

**Explanation/Description:** This discipline closely resembles the invisibility spell (q.v.), but it is weaker in some ways, more powerful in others. It enables the possessor to become invisible to creatures with only as many levels or hit dice as the psionic has cumulative levels of mastery: 1 at 1st level, 1 + 2 at 2nd level, 1 + 2 + 3 at 3rd level, etc. However, psionic invisibility cannot be detected by any form of magic, only a mind bar being able to prevent the power from operating with respect to that particular creature, for this power affects minds, not light waves or similar physical manifestations.

## Levitation

**Range:** 0  
**Duration:** 1 turn/level of mastery  
**Area of Effect:** Individual  
**Strength Point Cost:** 3/turn  
**Saving Throw:** None

**Explanation/Description:** This discipline is similar to the magic-user spell, levitation (q.v.). Levitation need not be exercised in a continuous period, i.e. a 1st level psionic can use the discipline on multiple occasions so long as the total duration of all uses together is 1 turn or less.

## Mind Over Body

**Range:** 0  
**Duration:** 2 days/level of mastery  
**Area of Effect:** Individual  
**Strength Point Cost:** 5/day  
**Saving Throw:** None

**Explanation/Description:** This discipline allows the possessor to suppress or mentally satisfy the need for water, food, rest and/or sleep. For each level of mastery, the psionic can use the discipline for up to 2 consecutive days, so at 2nd level, he or she can go 4 days without water, food, rest or sleep; at third level 6 days, etc. At some point, however, the possessor must spend an equal number of days of complete rest so as to restore this power. While the individual is not harmed, the discipline cannot be used again until complete rest is taken.

## Molecular Agitation

**Range:** Sight  
**Duration:** Special  
**Area of Effect:** One item or creature  
**Strength Point Cost:** 1/round  
**Saving Throw:** None

**Explanation/Description:** The power of molecular agitation enables the possessor to cause the molecules of an item to move more rapidly than is normal. Although only a small number of molecules can be so moved, continued exercise of the ability will have the following effects after 10 rounds:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Type of Material</th>
    <th>Molecular Agitation Effect</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>paper, parchment, straw</td>
    <td>aflame, burning brightly</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>dry wood, heavy cloth</td>
    <td>scorching and smouldering</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>water, wine</td>
    <td>boiling (if a small amount)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>flesh</td>
    <td>blistering*</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>metal</td>
    <td>hot to touch**</td>
  </tr>
</table>

*each round thereafter the victim will sustain 1 hit point of damage, cumulative, 1 that round, 2 the next, 3 the next, etc.

**at this point the effect is the same as the druid spell, heat metal (q.v.).

While the amount of material that the psionic can affect by molecular agitation does not appreciably increase, the time requirement does shorten by 1 round per level of mastery, so that at 10th level and beyond, the molecular agitation effect shown above requires only 1 round to achieve. Note that the item affected must be in the view (clairvoyance included) of the psionic individual.

## Object Reading

**Range:** Touch  
**Duration:** 1 round  
**Area:** Object touched  
**Strength Point Cost:** 1/round  
**Saving Throw:** None

**Explanation/Description:** This ability enables the possessor to detect psychic impressions left on an object by its previous owner. Thus, by handling an artifact found in a dungeon, the psionic would possibly be able to tell its owner’s race, alignment and probably fate. If the object had a long and legendary history he would have visions of its past, back through history. Not all objects (and certainly not all magical objects) give off these impressions, however.

## Precognition

**Range:** 0  
**Duration:** Special  
**Area of Effect:** Special  
**Strength Point Cost:** Special  
**Saving Throw:** None

**Explanation/Description:** The discipline of precognition is the ability to estimate the best probable course of action, or to estimate the probable outcome of an undertaking; this power applies only to the relatively immediate future. Estimation becomes more accurate with increased levels of possessing the ability, providing the number of unknown factors remains constant. Precognition accuracy is also a factor of combined intelligence and wisdom scores:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Total Intelligence and Wisdom Scores</th>
    <th colspan="3">Precognition Probability by Difficulty</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th></th>
    <th>Low</th>
    <th>Medium</th>
    <th>High</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>under 30</td>
    <td>40%</td>
    <td>30%</td>
    <td>20%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>30-33</td>
    <td>50%</td>
    <td>35%</td>
    <td>25%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>34-35</td>
    <td>65%</td>
    <td>45%</td>
    <td>35%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>36 & up</td>
    <td>70%</td>
    <td>50%</td>
    <td>40%</td>
  </tr>
</table>

For every level the ability is possessed, the probability of being able to correctly precognate goes up by a percentage equal to the level (2 levels equals 2%, 3 levels equals 3%, etc.) but never beyond a maximum precognition probability of 90%. The expenditure of psionic strength is directly related to the number of unknown factors which must be ascertained, i.e. if there are six basically solvable unknown factors then it costs 6 points, and the cost is not known to the individual precognating until after the fact. (In order to precognate the results of a melee, for example, each attack must be made and counted as an unknown, and in a melee with several individuals involved with several monsters, the cost per melee round could easily be 10 or more points.) If the psionically endowed individual has insufficient points to completely precognate, then the precognition ceases at the point when he has no longer any strength to continue. Time is also a factor of precognating — a short duration means a typically low difficulty factor. If 1-4 turns is considered a short time, 5-30 turns is of medial difficulty, and anything beyond 30 turns (5 hours) becomes a high difficulty precognition; however, unknown factors will alter this rule, so that a short time precognition with many (basically

113
