# HIRELINGS

## HIRELINGS

At any time, a character may attempt to hire various different sorts of workers, servants, or guards. The success of such hiring is entirely dependent upon availability of the type desired, wage and bonus offers, and to some extent the character’s charisma. Typical hirelings are:

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Alchemist</td>
    <td>Blacksmith</td>
    <td>Linkboy</td>
    <td>Teamster</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Armorer</td>
    <td>Crossbowman</td>
    <td>Man-at-arms</td>
    <td>Valet</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Bearer</td>
    <td>Engineer</td>
    <td>Steward</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

Your character will have to locate the whereabouts of whatever type of hirelings he or she desires to take into service, and it will be up to your character to determine wages and salaries in the area he or she is in.

Employment can be by the hour, day, week, month, or year according to the desires of the character and agreeability of the persons to be hired. Your referee will handle all such matters as they occur.

Note that the number of hirelings is in no way limited by charisma, and hirelings differ considerably from henchmen who are discussed immediately hereafter. The loyalty of hirelings is quite similar to that of henchmen, though, and the discussion of the loyalty of henchmen can be applied to hirelings of all sorts. (See HENCHMEN hereafter.)

## HENCHMEN

As discussed in the preceding section regarding CHARACTER ABILITIES, charisma has a great effect on the number of henchmen a character is able to attract.

A henchman is a more or less devoted follower of a character. In return for the use of his or her abilities and talents, the henchman receives support, lodging, and a share of his or her master’s or mistress’ earnings — in the form of stipends or as a share of treasure taken. Henchmen are always of a character race and character class, but are never player characters.

The alignment of a henchman should be compatible with that of the player character whom he or she serves. Difference in alignment will certainly affect the loyalty of all henchmen, if alignment is radically different.

It will usually be necessary for your character to visit various inns and drinking establishments in search of henchmen. It is also possible that a number of notices will have to be posted, perhaps in conjunction with the employment of a crier to announce the employment offered. The cost of such is often high — in rounds of drinks, food, tips, gratuities, bribes, fees and so forth. These costs are in addition to actual sums paid to the henchman eventually employed. Locating non-human characters such as dwarves, elves, and the like might be even more protracted, difficult, and costly than the hiring of human and semi-human henchmen. This depends on campaign circumstances — such as whether or not non-humans are common in the area and whether or not non-humans tend to associate with humans and frequent the inns and taverns.

Once a henchman is brought into your character’s service, it will be necessary to pay a wage plus support and upkeep. Your referee will inform you as to such costs. When a henchman accompanies your character on adventures, he or she must be given a portion of treasure, both money and magic, just as a player character would. However, the share can be lesser, for all of the henchman’s expenses are paid for by his or her master or mistress. Naturally, it is a good idea to give a henchman as much treasure as possible, for in that way the henchman gains experience points.

Experience awarded to henchmen is usually much less than that which would be given to a player character. This is because the henchmen are acting under the direction of their master or mistress. So you should expect that your character’s henchmen will get about 50% of the experience points which their share in the slaying of opponents and garnered treasure actually totals — possibly even less if your character bore the brunt of the action and closely directed the henchmen. The loyalty of henchmen is based on many factors. Charisma of the player character is very important. Remuneration — support, upkeep, wages, bonuses, and sharing of treasure — plays a big part also. The involvement of henchmen in adventuring is important, as are the activities of the character (and what he requires of the henchmen) during the course of adventuring. For example:

Assuming the character has above average charisma, he or she could be somewhat less than generous in remuneration and still have henchmen with about average loyalty. If remuneration or activity were above the minimum required, loyalty would be correspondingly higher. If both remuneration and activity were exceptional, the loyalty base of henchmen would be likewise exceptional. Actions to protect the lives and welfare of henchmen, or saving the life of or resurrecting henchmen, give loyalty above average.

Disloyalty will come into play in combat and other stress situations. Disvalued henchmen will betray or desert their master or mistress. (See MORALE.)

## TIME

Time in the campaign is very important. Your referee will keep strict account of the time consumed by various characters, for it is likely to separate them, since not all participants are likely to play at the same actual time. Time costs characters money in support, upkeep, and wage payments. It takes time to adventure, to heal wounds, to memorize spells, to learn languages, to build strongholds, to create magic items — a very long time in the last given case.

In adventuring below ground, a turn in the dungeon lasts 10 minutes (see also MOVEMENT). In combat, the turn is further divided into 10 melee rounds, or simply rounds. Rounds are subdivided into 10 segments, for purposes of determining initiative (q.v.) and order of attacks. Thus a turn is 10 minutes, a round 1 minute, and a segment 6 seconds.

Outdoors, time is measured in days, usually subdivided into daylight (movement) and night (rest) periods. Thus, while actual time playing is about the same for a dungeon adventure, the game time spent is much greater in the case of outdoor adventures.

## DISTANCE

For purposes of the game distances are basically one-third with respect to spell and missile range from outdoors to indoors/underground situations. Thus most ranges are shown as inches by means of the symbol “, i.e. 1”, etc. Outdoors, 1” equals 10 yards. Indoors 1” equals 10 feet. Such a ratio is justifiable, to some extent, regardless of game considerations.

Actual effective range of an arrow shot from a longbow is around 210 yards maximum, in clear light and open terrain. Underground, with little light and low ceilings overhead, a bowshot of 210 feet is about maximum. Archery implies arching arrows. Slings are in this category as are hurled darts and javelins, all arching in flight to achieve distance. Crossbows are a notable exception, but under the visibility conditions of a dungeon setting, a yards to feet conversion is not unreasonable.

Magic and spells are, most certainly, devices of the game. In order to make them fit the constrictions of the underground labyrinth, a one for three reduction is necessary. It would be folly, after all, to try to have such as effective attack modes if feet were not converted to yards outdoors, where visibility, movement, and conventional weapons attack ranges are based on actual fact. (See MOVEMENT.)

Distance scale and areas of effect for spells (and missiles) are designed to fit the game. The tripling of range outdoors is reasonable, as it allows for recreation of actual ranges for hurled javelins, arrows fired from longbows, or whatever. In order to keep magic spells on a par, their range is also tripled. IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT OUTDOOR SCALE BE USED FOR RANGE ONLY, NEVER FOR SPELL AREA OF EFFECT (which is kept at 1” = 10’) UNLESS A FIGURE RATIO OF 1:10 OR 1:20 (1 casting equals 10 or 20 actual creatures or things in most cases) IS USED, AND CONSTRUCTIONS SUCH AS BUILDINGS, CASTLES, WALLS, ETC. ARE SCALED TO FIGURES RATHER THAN TO GROUND SCALE. Note that the foregoing assumes that a ground scale of 1” to 10 yards is used.

Movement scale is kept as flexible as possible in order to deal with the multitude of applications it has, i.e. dungeon movement (exploring and otherwise), city travel, treks through the outdoors, and combat situations arising during the course of any such movements. Your referee will have information which will enable him or her to adjust the movement rate to the applicable time scale for any situation.

39
