# COMBAT

in conjunction with a parry, and opponent creatures are able to follow if not otherwise engaged. Fleeing means as rapid a withdrawal from combat as possible; while it exposes the character to rear attack at the time, subsequent attacks can only be made if the opponent is able to follow the fleeing character at equal or greater speed.

## Example of Combat:

A party of 5 characters — a magic-user, a cleric, a thief, a human fighter, and a dwarf fighter surprise an illusionist with 20 orcs. The opponents are 30' distant, and the magic-user immediately begins casting a sleep spell. The cleric also prepares to cast a spell, silence, 15' radius. Meanwhile, the thief darts to the rear of the party to attempt to hide in the shadows and attack from behind when opportunity presents itself; the human fighter knocks an arrow and shoots it at the illusionist; and the dwarf hurls an axe. The surprise segment is over, and initiative is determined. The illusionist/orcs win initiative, and while the former begins a spell of his own, the latter rush to attack, hurling spears as they come. A spear hits the magic-user, so the sleep spell is spoiled. The orcs are attacked by the fighters, the cleric casts his spell upon the illusionist, and the magical silence both spoils his prismatic spray spell and enhances the chances for the thief’s attack, for he is successfully slinking and sliding around in the shadows. Thus, after surprise and 1 melee round, the party has inflicted 2 hits upon the illusionist, spoiled his spell attack, and felled one orc and wounded another. They have taken 3 spear hits and had one of their spell attacks ruined.

Initiative is now checked for the second round. The illusionist/orcs again win initiative and attack first, 5 orcs going after each fighter to grapple, 6 rushing the magic-user, and 3 heading for the cleric. The fighters are pulled down, as is the magic-user, but the cleric avoids their grasp. The illusionist begins casting another spell, one which requires no verbal component; he does not hear the thief behind him. It is now the party’s turn in the round. The cleric smites 1 of the onrushing orcs and kills it, and the thief stabs the illusionist from behind with his sword, killing him; the fighters and magic-user are held fast by orcs, so they can do nothing. Round 2 is over.

The initiative roll in the third round goes to the party. The cleric kills another orc, while the thief rushes at the orcs holding the nearest fighter. It is now the orcs’ turn, and as their leader is dead and they still face 2 powerful opponents, they will check morale. It is probable that they will kill the pinned characters with dagger thrusts if their morale does not break, or that they will release the pinned characters and run away if their morale is bad.

## COMBAT PROCEDURES

Most magical combat and breath weapons do not require the attacker to determine if the weapon hits, but the target creatures are allowed saving throws to see if they avoided the attack or at least partially-negated it. Other attacks require a “to hit” dice roll by the attackers, and damage is always scored if the hit is made. A further saving throw might be required if the hit scored has other possible effects such as death due to poison, paralysis, etc. Whether or not a hit is scored depends on the power of the attacker and the armor class of the defender. Each of these topics is discussed below:

### Saving Throw:

The chance to avoid or partially negate magical and breath attack forms is known as the save. (Note that magic items and even normal items and weapons must be saved for due to such attacks, falls or blows. Consider the fate of a cloak when exposed to dragon fire, a suit of magic armor struck by a lightning bolt, or a magic hammer flying through a cone of cold prior to striking its target.) Your Dungeon Master has tables which show the saving throw scores for these attack forms, by class of character, by level of experience in class. These base numbers are modified by the power of the attack, and by magical protections and character class and race.

### Armor Class:

The type of armor worn, the inclusion of a shield, magical factors, and dexterity are inclusions in overall armor class. The size ratio is also important at times, i.e. a dwarf adds 4 factors to his armor class if his opponent is a giant. For example, splint mail is armor class 4, and if a shield is added the armor class becomes 3, but suppose it is a magical +1 shield; then armor class becomes 2. Now assume that the character has a

# HEALING

displacer cloak, so the armor class becomes 0, and furthermore, because the character has a 16 dexterity, a final bonus of +2 is given, and the armor class of this character is -2. If the character is a dwarf, a giant attempting to hit him or her would have to hit AC -6, because of the size differential penalty.

Now let us take this character through a few attacks. First the dwarf is engaged in melee against a band of 7 hobgoblins. His shield bonus is good only against a maximum of 3 opponents, so 4 hobgoblins would attack at armor class 0. Furthermore, as the dwarf can only see and react to opponents before him, these same 4 hobgoblins would also attack the dwarf without the latter getting dexterity bonuses, so their attacks would be against armor class 2. Similarly, if giants hurled boulders at the dwarf, rather than struck at him with their weapons, his dexterity and size bonuses would not accrue to him, so instead of AC -6, the boulders would attack a target with AC 0.

### First Strike:

The 1 minute melee round assumes much activity — rushes, retreats, feints, parries, checks, and so on. Once during this period each combatant has the opportunity to get a real blow in. Usually this is indicated by initiative, but sometimes other circumstances will prevail. High level fighters get multiple blows per round, so they will usually strike first and last in a round. Slowed creatures always strike last. Hasted/speeded creatures strike first. A solid formation of creatures with long weapons will strike opponents with shorter weapons first, a rushing opponent will be struck first by a pole arm/spear set in its path. Your DM will adjudicate such matters with common sense. When important single combats occur, then dexterities and weapons factors will be used to determine the order and number of strikes in a round.

### Weapon Factors:

You have already seen information regarding the damage each type of weapon does, how heavy each is, how long and how much space each needs, and each weapon’s relative speed factor. The same charts also give relative efficiency against armor types. Your referee will use these factors in determination of melee combats by relating them to his Attack Matrices.

### Monster Attack Damage:

Monsters with weapons will generally attack much as characters do. Those with natural weaponry such as claws, talons, teeth, fangs, tusks, horns, etc. will use the matrix for monster attacks. There are exceptions to both cases.

### Attack and Saving Throw Matrices:

Your DM has matrices for each class of character by level groups, showing the scores required to hit the various sorts of armor and armor classifications. Normal men such as men-at-arms are always considered at level 0. Monsters are classed by their hit dice. All creatures use the same saving throw matrices; the modifier is relative class, i.e. fighter, thief, etc. Items save on a special matrix.

## DAMAGE

Damage is meted out in hit points. If any creature reaches 0 or negative hit points, it is dead. Certain magical means will prevent actual death, particularly a ring of regeneration (cf. MONSTER MANUAL, Troll).

## FALLING DAMAGE

Falling into pits, from ledges, down shafts, and so forth will certainly cause damage unless the fall is broken. While such falls could break limbs and other bones, it is probable that your referee will simply use a hit points damage computation based on 1d6 for each 10' of distance fallen to a maximum of 20d6, plus or minus adjustments for the surface fallen upon. This treatment gives characters a better survival chance, although it is not as “realistic” as systems to determine breaks, sprains, dislocations, internal organ damage, etc.

## HEALING

There are numerous ways to restore lost hit points. The most mundane is by resting and allowing time to do the job. For each day of rest, 1 hit point of damage is restored. After 30 game days have passed, hit points accrue at the rate of 5 per day thereafter. The “laying on of hands” by paladins,

105
