# CHARACTER CLASSES (MULTI-CLASSES)

protection, the use of weaponry, and spells. Hit points are good on the average ( $5\frac{1}{2} + 2\frac{1}{2} = 8 + 2 = 4$ hit points per double-classed level). Elves and half-elves may be fighter/magic-users.

**Fighter/Illusionist**: See Fighter/Magic-user above. Gnomes may be fighter/illusionists.

**Fighter/Thief**: By combining these two classes — the armor, weapons, and combat capabilities of the fighter with the stealth and other abilities of the thief — a very effective character is created, even though thieving functions restrict the character to leather armor and no shield. Hit points are good. Dwarves, elves, gnomes, half-elves, halflings, and half-orcs may be fighter/thieves.

**Fighter/Assassin**: This combination gives excellent missile and melee combat ability, plus assassination and stealth potential. Hit points are good. Half-orcs may be fighter/assassins.

**Fighter/Magic-user/Thief**: Combat, spell, and stealth capabilities are given to the character who opts this multi-class combination. This is a very powerful mix. Hit points are good ( $5\frac{1}{2} + 2\frac{1}{2} + 3\frac{1}{2} = 11\frac{1}{2} + 3 = 4$ ) on the average. Elves and half-elves may be fighter/magic-user/thieves.

**Magic-user/Thief**: This combination does not offer all of the options open to a fighter/magic-user/thief, but advancement is usually more rapid. Average hit points are fair, i.e. 3 per level. Elves and half-elves may be magic-user/thieves.

**Illusionist/Thief**: See Magic-User/Thief above. Gnomes may be illusionist/thieves.

## The Character With Two Classes

Unlike multi-classed characters who are of non- or semi-human race, the character with two classes must be human. To attain the second class, the character must switch his or her profession at some point. Thereafter no progression in the original class is possible.

In order to switch from one class to another, the character must have an ability score of 15 or more in the principal attribute(s) of the original class and a 17 or 18 in the principal attribute(s) of the class changed to. Note that nearly any combination of classes is thus possible, i.e. cleric & fighter, cleric & paladin, cleric & ranger, etc. Alignment will preclude some combinations.

When the character opts to cease his or her old profession and become a new class, the character retains the number of hit dice (and the commensurate hit points) due to a character of the level of his or her class. However, all other functions of the character are at 1st level of experience, for that is his or her ability in the newly espoused class. Furthermore, if, during the course of any adventure, the character resorts to the use of any of the capabilities of functions of his or her former class, the character gains no experience for the adventure. Having switched classes, the character must perform strictly within the parameters of his or her new profession. Reversion to the former class negates all experience potential for the new class with respect to the course of recent activities, i.e. the adventure during which original profession functions were resorted to.

At such time as the character has attained a level of experience in his or her new class which exceeds the character’s former class level, the following benefits are gained:

1. A hit die appropriate to the new class is gained for each increase in level of experience, up to the maximum normal for the class in question (and thereafter hit points are likewise gained), and

2. The character may mix functions freely and still gain experience, although restrictions regarding armor, shield, and/or weapon apply with regard to operations particular to one or both classes.

**Example**: A character with ability scores of 15 strength, 17 intelligence, 12 wisdom, 10 dexterity, 16 constitution, and 7 charisma is begun as a fighter. After attaining 6th level, the player switches the character to magic-user. This allows the character to retain six ten-sided hit dice, but in all other respects he or she must be a 1st level magic-user, wearing no armor, carrying those weapons usable by his or her new class, and using spells to combat opponents. When 7th level of experience is gained, however, the

---

# ALIGNMENT

character gets a four-sided hit die for additional hit points he or she can sustain at the new level. Furthermore, the character can now carry (but not wear) armor and weapons not normally usable by magic-users, and resort to their use if the need arises and not be penalized in respect to experience as a magic-user, for he or she has already surpassed in the new class the disciplines of the former. Thus, no harm accrues to his or her experience as a magic-user. Note that this does not allow spell use while armor clad, such as an elven fighter/magic user is able to do.

## ALIGNMENT

After generating the abilities of your character, selecting his or her race, and deciding upon a class, it is necessary to determine the alignment of the character. It is possible that the selection of the class your character will profess has predetermined alignment: a druid is neutral, a paladin is lawful good, a thief can be neutral or evil, an assassin is always evil. Yet, except for druids and paladins, such restrictions still leave latitude — the thief can be lawful neutral, lawful evil, neutral evil, chaotic evil, chaotic neutral, neutral, or even neutral good; and the assassin has nearly as many choices. The alignments possible for characters are described below.

**Chaotic Evil**: The major precepts of this alignment are freedom, randomness, and woe. Laws and order, kindness, and good deeds are disdained. Life has no value. By promoting chaos and evil, those of this alignment hope to bring themselves to positions of power, glory, and prestige in a system ruled by individual caprice and their own whims.

**Chaotic Good**: While creatures of this alignment view freedom and the randomness of action as ultimate truths, they likewise place value on life and the welfare of each individual. Respect for individualism is also great. By promoting the gods of chaotic good, characters of this alignment seek to spread their values throughout the world.

**Chaotic Neutral**: Above respect for life and good, or disregard for life and promotion of evil, the chaotic neutral places randomness and disorder. Good and evil are complimentary balance arms. Neither are preferred, nor must either prevail, for ultimate chaos would then suffer.

**Lawful Evil**: Creatures of this alignment are great respecters of laws and strict order, but life, beauty, truth, freedom and the like are held as valueless, or at least scorned. By adhering to stringent discipline, those of lawful evil alignment hope to impose their yoke upon the world.

**Lawful Good**: While as strict in their prosecution of law and order, characters of lawful good alignment follow these precepts to improve the common weal. Certain freedoms must, of course, be sacrificed in order to bring order; but truth is of highest value, and life and beauty of great importance. The benefits of this society are to be brought to all.

**Lawful Neutral**: Those of this alignment view regulation as all-important, taking a middle road betwixt evil and good. This is because the ultimate harmony of the world — and the whole of the universe — is considered by lawful neutral creatures to have its sole hope rest upon law and order. Evil or good are immaterial beside the determined purpose of bringing all to predictability and regulation.

**Neutral Evil**: The neutral evil creature views law and chaos as unnecessary considerations, for pure evil is all-in-all. Either might be used, but both are disdained as foolish clutter useless in eventually bringing maximum evilness to the world.

**Neutral Good**: Unlike those directly opposite them (neutral evil) in alignment, creatures of neutral good believe that there must be some regulation in combination with freedoms if the best is to be brought to the world — the most beneficial conditions for living things in general and intelligent creatures in particular.

**True Neutral**: The “true” neutral looks upon all other alignments as facets of the system of things. Thus, each aspect — evil and good, chaos and law — of things must be retained in balance to maintain the status quo; for things as they are cannot be improved upon except temporarily, and even then but superficially. Nature will prevail and keep things as they were meant to be, provided the “wheel” surrounding the hub of nature does not become unbalanced due to the work of unnatural forces — such as human and other intelligent creatures interfering with what is meant to be.

Naturally, there are all variations and shades of tendencies within each alignment. The descriptions are generalizations only. A character can be

33
