# SPELL EXPLANATIONS

Each spell is presented here in exactly the same format. The spell is first identified by name and type of magic it involves. Thereafter its level, range (distance it can be cast), duration, area of effect, components, casting time, and saving throw are shown. Finally, an explanation of the spell and a description of its effects are given in some detail.

Range is shown in inches (See DISTANCE) or as “touch”, which indicates the caster must physically contact the recipient of the spell with his or her hand.

Duration is given as number of turns, rounds, or simply “instantaneous”, as in the case of a lightning bolt which lasts only a brief moment. (See TIME.)

Area of Effect shows how large an area the spell covers, or how many persons or creatures it will affect.

Components, as previously mentioned, are verbal (V), somatic (S), and/or material (M). This indicates which are part of the spell.

Casting Time shows the number of melee rounds, or segments of a melee round, required to cast the spell. Remember that there are 10 segments to a melee round, 10 melee rounds to a turn. Some spells require additional time and preparation.

Saving Throw tells whether a saving throw is possible, and if it is possible, whether success negates (neg.) the spell or reduces its effects by 50% (½).

## CLERIC SPELLS

### Notes Regarding Cleric Spells:

All material components required for the various spells are used by completion of the spell in question with the notable exceptions of standard religious items, i.e. religious symbols and prayer beads or similar devices.

The reversal of some spells might well place the cleric in a questionable position with respect to alignment. The use of spells which promote weal must be shunned by evil clerics in many cases. Likewise, spells which are baneful may be used only at peril by clerics of good alignment. Incautious use of spells will change the cleric’s alignment, if such usage continues unchecked, and it is up to the player to guard his or her character’s alignment with care. In any event, the cleric must decide which application of a reversible spell will be used prior to learning it, i.e. it is not possible to have one spell both ways. In like manner, the mere request for a spell (or its opposite) through prayer will not guarantee that the spell will be given to the cleric. As the spell level becomes higher, confidence will decrease that that deity will concur.

Your Dungeon Master might alter the material components of spells, require only religious adjuncts as material, or just do away with them. Consult your referee in this regard and ask his ruling and reasoning.

---

# CLERIC SPELLS (1ST LEVEL)

## First Level Spells:

### Bless (Conjuration/Summoning) Reversible

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Level: 1</td>
    <td>Components: V, S, M</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Range: 6"</td>
    <td>Casting Time: 1 round</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Duration: 6 melee rounds</td>
    <td>Saving Throw: None</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Area of Effect: 5" × 5"</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

**Explanation/Description:** Upon uttering the bless spell, the caster raises the morale of friendly creatures by +1. Furthermore, it raises their “to hit” dice rolls by +1. A blessing, however, will affect only those not already engaged in melee combat. This spell can be reversed by the cleric to a curse upon enemies which lowers morale and “to hit” by -1. The caster determines at what range (up to 6") he or she will cast the spell, and it then affects all creatures in an area 5" square centered on the point the spell was cast upon. In addition to the verbal and somatic gesture components, the bless requires holy water, while the curse requires the sprinkling of specially polluted water.

### Command (Enchantment/Charm)

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Level: 1</td>
    <td>Components: V</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Range: 1"</td>
    <td>Casting Time: 1 segment</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Duration: 1 round</td>
    <td>Saving Throw: Special</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Area of Effect: One creature</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

**Explanation/Description:** This spell enables the cleric to issue a command of a single word. The command must be uttered in a language which the spell recipient is able to understand. The individual will obey to the best of his/her/its ability only so long as the command is absolutely clear and unequivocal, i.e. “Suicide!” could be a noun, so the creature would ignore the command. A command to “Die!” would cause the recipient to fall in a faint or cataleptic state for 1 round, but thereafter the creature would be alive and well. Typical command words are: back, halt, flee, run, stop, fall, fly, go, leave, surrender, sleep, rest, etc. Undead are not affected by a command. Creatures with intelligence of 13 or more, and creatures with 6 or more hit dice (or experience levels) are entitled to a saving throw versus magic. (Creatures with 13 or higher intelligence and 6 hit dice/levels do not get 2 saving throws!)

### Create Water (Alteration) Reversible

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Level: 1</td>
    <td>Components: V, S, M</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Range: 1"</td>
    <td>Casting Time: 1 round</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Duration: Permanent</td>
    <td>Saving Throw: None</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Area of Effect: Up to 27 cubic feet</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

**Explanation/Description:** When the cleric casts a create water spell, four gallons of water are generated for every level of experience of the caster, i.e. a 2nd level cleric creates eight gallons of water, a 3rd level twelve gallons, a 4th level sixteen gallons, etc. The water is clean and drinkable (it is just like rain water). Reversing the spell, destroy water, obliterates without trace (such as vapor, mist, fog or steam) a like quantity of water. Created water will last until normally used or evaporated, spilled, etc. Water can be created or destroyed in an area as small as will actually contain the liquid or in an area as large as 27 cubic feet (one cubic yard). The spell requires at least a drop of water to create, or a pinch of dust to destroy, water. Note that water cannot be created within a living thing.

### Cure Light Wounds (Necromantic) Reversible

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Level: 1</td>
    <td>Components: V, S</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Range: Touch</td>
    <td>Casting Time: 5 segments</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Duration: Permanent</td>
    <td>Saving Throw: None</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Area of Effect: Character touched</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

**Explanation/Description:** Upon laying his or her hand upon a creature, the cleric causes from 1 to 8 hit points of wound or other injury damage to the creature’s body to be healed. This healing will not affect creatures without corporeal bodies, nor will it cure wounds of creatures not living or those which can be harmed only by iron, silver, and/or magical weapons. Its reverse, cause light wounds, operates in the same manner; and if a person is avoiding this touch, a melee combat “to hit” die is rolled to determine if the cleric’s hand strikes the opponent and causes such a wound. Note that cured wounds are permanent only insofar as the creature does not sustain further damage, and that caused wounds will heal — or can be cured — just as any normal injury will. Caused light wounds are 1 to 8 hit points of damage.

43
