# ILLUSIONIST SPELLS (7TH LEVEL)

touch will conform to the visual illusion. If hallucinatory terrain is created, touch will not cause it to vanish.

## Seventh Level Spells:

### Alter Reality (Illusion/Phantasm, Conjunction/Summoning)

- **Level:** 7
- **Range:** Unlimited
- **Duration:** Special
- **Area of Effect:** Special
- **Components:** Special
- **Casting Time:** Special
- **Saving Throw:** Special

**Explanation/Description:** The alter reality spell is similar to the seventh level magic-user limited wish spell (q.v.). In order to effect the magic fully, the illusionist must depict the enactment of the alteration of reality through the casting of a phantasmal force, as well as verbalization in a limited form, before the spell goes into action.

### Astral Spell (Alteration)

- **Level:** 7
- **Range:** Touch
- **Duration:** Special
- **Area of Effect:** Special
- **Components:** V,S
- **Casting Time:** 3 turns
- **Saving Throw:** None

**Explanation/Description:** This spell is the same as the seventh level cleric spell, astral spell (q.v.).

### Prismatic Spray (Abjuration, Conjunction/Summoning)

- **Level:** 7
- **Range:** 0
- **Duration:** Instantaneous
- **Area of Effect:** 7" long plane, 1½" wide at end, ½" wide at base
- **Components:** V,S
- **Casting Time:** 7 segments
- **Saving Throw:** Special

**Explanation/Description:** When this spell is cast, the illusionist causes 7 rays of the prismatic sphere spell (q.v.) to spring from his or her hand. Any creature in the area of effect will be touched by 1 or more of the rays. To determine which ray strikes the concerned creature, roll an eight-sided die:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>1 = red</th>
      <th>5 = blue</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>2 = orange</td>
      <td>6 = indigo</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>3 = yellow</td>
      <td>7 = violet</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>4 = green</td>
      <td>8 = struck by 2 rays, roll again twice ignoring any 8's</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


Saving throws apply only with respect to those prismatic color rays which call for such.

### Prismatic Wall (Abjuration, Conjunction/Summoning)

- **Level:** 7
- **Range:** 1"
- **Duration:** 1 turn/level
- **Area of Effect:** Special
- **Components:** V,S
- **Casting Time:** 7 Segments
- **Saving Throw:** Special

**Explanation/Description:** The prismatic wall spell is similar to the prismatic sphere spell (q.v.). It differs only in that the spell creates a wall, or curtain, of scintillating colors. The wall is of maximum proportions of 4' wide per level of experience of the spell caster and 2' high per level of experience.

### Vision (Divination)

- **Level:** 7
- **Range:** 0
- **Duration:** Special
- **Area of Effect:** The Illusionist
- **Components:** V,S,M
- **Casting Time:** 7 segments
- **Saving Throw:** None

**Explanation/Description:** At such time as the illusionist wishes to gain supernatural guidance, he or she casts a vision spell, calling upon whatever power he or she desires aid from, and asking the question for which a vision is to be given to answer. Two six-sided dice are rolled. If they total 2 to 6, the power is annoyed and will cause the illusionist, by ultra-powerful geas or quest, to do some service, and no question will be answered. If the dice total 7 to 9, the power is indifferent, and some minor vision, possibly unrelated to the question, will be given. A score of 10 or better indicates the vision is granted. Note that the material component of the spell is the sacrifice of something valued by the spell caster and/or by the power supplicated. The more precious the sacrifice, the better the chance of spell success, for a very precious item will give a bonus of +1 on the dice, one that is extremely precious will add +2, and a priceless/nonesuch will add +3.

## First Level Magic-user Spells

- **Level:** 7
- **Range:** •
- **Duration:** *
- **Area of Effect:** •
- **Components:** *
- **Casting Time:** •
- **Saving Throw:** *

*As appropriate to the spell in question

**Explanation/Description:** The illusionist gains four of the following first level magic-user spells at the 14th level of experience and an additional one as each additional level of experience is gained. The spells are:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Affect Normal Fires</th>
      <th>Mending</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Burning Hands</td>
      <td>Message</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Charm Person</td>
      <td>Nystul’s Magic Aura</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Comprehend Languages</td>
      <td>Protection from Evil</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Enlarge</td>
      <td>Read Magic</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Erase</td>
      <td>Shield</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Feather Fall</td>
      <td>Shocking Grasp</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Friends</td>
      <td>Sleep</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Hold Portal</td>
      <td>Tenser’s Floating Disc</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Magic Missile</td>
      <td>Unseen Servent</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


The illusionist may learn any spell or spells from the preceding list. He or she must seek the spells in the same manner as a magic-user. If the illusionist chooses to take this “spell”, he or she actually takes four or more first level magic-user spells as a seventh level spell.

## SPELL CASTING

The casting of spells during the course of an adventure will be discussed at length hereafter in the section of this book which deals with all aspects of an expedition into underground or outdoors settings.

Each character able to cast spells can remember only a certain number at any given level. (This number can be modified by magical means.) Once a spell is cast, that particular spell is wiped from the mind, forgotten, but another spell of the same type can still be remembered, i.e. the spell caster can have several of the same spell memorized and prepared for, within the number limits for his or her particular class and level.

Most spells can be cast during the course of a single melee round, although some — particularly high level ones — require more time. Casting a spell requires certain actions, and if these are interrupted, the spell cannot be cast and it is lost from memory. A good example of this is a magic-user about to cast a fireball spell being struck by an arrow when in the midst of the spell. Magical silence or physical gagging will prevent verbal (V) spell completion. Magical immobility prevents any spell casting. Physical restraint, including grappling, grasping, binding, etc. prevents proper somatic (S) spell completion, for gestures must be exact and movements free and as prescribed. Despite these restrictions, there is no doubt that spells in general are potent offensive and defensive weapons, providing the caster does not hesitate, i.e. he or she must know which spell is being cast when the melee round begins.

As each spell is cast, it is crossed off the character’s list of spells memorized for that particular expedition. The same is true for any material components which are required for the spell cast; the component(s) must be ready and then crossed off as expended.

### Scroll Spells:

Use of scroll spells is similar to the casting of normal (memorized) spells. They too disappear when read off the scroll, for their magical properties and energies are bound up in the characters, runes, signs, sigils, and words written for the particular spell. Being written, the scroll spell requires no somatic or material components. The time required to cast (read) a scroll spell is exactly that shown for the memorized spell. Of course, this assumes the scroll is in hand and ready to read. In general, scroll spells will be 12th level as regards range and duration and area of effect. Notable variations occur in projectile attack spells (magic missile,

100
