# ALIGNMENT

basically good in its “true” neutrality, or tend towards evil. It is probable that your campaign referee will keep a graph of the drift of your character on the alignment chart. This is affected by the actions (and desires) of your character during the course of each adventure, and will be reflected on the graph. You may find that these actions are such as to cause the declared alignment to be shifted towards, or actually to, some other.

## Changing Alignment:

While involuntary change of alignment is quite possible, it is very difficult for a character to voluntarily switch from one to another, except within limited areas. Evil alignment can be varied along the like axis. The neutral character can opt for some more specific alignment. Your referee will probably require certain stringent sacrifices and appropriate acts — possibly a quest, as well — for any other voluntary alignment change. In fact, even axial change within evil or good, or radial movement from neutrality may require strong proofs of various sorts.

Further voluntary change will be even more difficult. Changing back to a forsaken alignment is next to impossible on a voluntary basis. Even involuntary drift will bring the necessity of great penance.

# CHARACTER HIT POINTS

Each character has a varying number of hit points, just as monsters do. These hit points represent how much damage (actual or potential) the character can withstand before being killed. A certain amount of these hit points represent the actual physical punishment which can be sustained. The remainder, a significant portion of hit points at higher levels, stands for skill, luck, and/or magical factors. A typical man-at-arms can take about 5 hit points of damage before being killed. Let us suppose that a 10th level fighter has 55 hit points, plus a bonus of 30 hit points for his constitution, for a total of 85 hit points. This is the equivalent of about 18 hit dice for creatures, about what it would take to kill four huge warhorses. It is ridiculous to assume that even a fantastic fighter can take that much punishment. The same holds true to a lesser extent for clerics, thieves, and the other classes. Thus, the majority of hit points are symbolic of combat skill, luck (bestowed by supernatural powers), and magical forces.

Hit points are determined by hit dice. At 1st level a character has but one hit die (exception: rangers and monks begin with two dice each). At each successive level another hit die is gained, i.e. the die is rolled to determine how many additional hit points the character gets. Hit points can be magically restored by healing potions, cure wounds, spells, rings of regeneration, or even by wish spells. However, a character’s hit points can never exceed the total initially scored by hit dice, constitution bonus (or penalty) and magical devices. For example, if a character has 26 hit points at the beginning of an adventure, he or she cannot drink a potion or be enchanted to above that number, 26 in this case.

As an example, let us assume that the character with 26 hit points mentioned above is engaged in an adventure. Early in the course of exploring the dungeon, he or she falls into a 16’ deep pit taking one six-sided die (1d6) of damage — 4 hit points of damage so the character drops to 22 hit points. Next, he or she takes 15 hit points of damage in combat, so the character drops to 7 hit points. A cleverly, the party uses a cure serious wounds spell on the character, and this restores 10 (for example, depending upon the die roll) of his or her lost hit points, so the character has a total of 17. Later activities reduce the character to 3 hit points, but the party uses a wish spell to restore all members to full hit points, so at that time the character goes up to 26 once more.

Rest also restores hit points, for it gives the body a chance to heal itself and regain the stamina or force which adds the skill, luck, and magical hit points.

Your character’s class will determine which sort of die you will roll to determine hit points. In some campaigns the referee will keep this total secret, informing players only that they feel “strong”, “fatigued” or “very weak”, thus indicating waning hit points. In other campaigns the Dungeon Master will have players record their character’s hit points and keep track of all changes. Both methods are acceptable, and it is up to your DM as to which will be used in the campaign you participate in.

# ESTABLISHING THE CHARACTER

By determining abilities, race, class, alignment, and hit points you have

# CHARACTER LANGUAGES

created your character. Next you must name him or her, and possibly give some family background (and name a next of kin as heir to the possessions of the character if he or she should meet an untimely death) to personify the character. Having done all that, your Dungeon Master will introduce your character to the campaign setting. In all likelihood, whether the locale is a village, town, or city, your character will have to acquaint himself or herself with the territory.

The first step will often be getting into the place, i.e. a gate guard demanding to know what business you have in the town or city. Thereafter it will be necessary to locate a safe and reasonably priced place in which to lodge — typically an inn of some sort, but perhaps a rented cat, a loft or even chambers at a hostel. Since the location selected will have to serve as base and depot, it must be relatively safe from intrusion or burglary. Once a headquarters has been found, your character can set about learning the lay of the land, and attempt to find the trade establishments needed to supply the desired equipment for adventuring. Perhaps it will also be necessary to locate where other player characters reside in order to engage in joint expeditions.

In any event, your character created, personified, and established will be ready to adventure once equipment is purchased and relations with other player characters are settled. If player characters are not immediately available, or if they are not co-operative, it is advisable that men-at-arms be hired. Hirelings of this sort, as well as henchmen (q.v.), are detailed in the sections entitled HIRELINGS and HENCHMEN.

# CHARACTER LANGUAGES

All humans, as well as those semi-humans and non-humans in close contact with people, speak the “common tongue”. This language is spoken by all states in the central campaign area, but your referee may well have areas in which the common tongue is different from that which your character speaks.

In addition to the common tongue, all intelligent creatures able to converse in speech use special languages particular to their alignment. These alignment languages are: Chaotic Evil, Chaotic Good, Chaotic Neutral, Lawful Evil, Lawful Good, Lawful Neutral, Neutral Evil, Neutral Good, and Neutrality. The alignment of your character will dictate which language he or she speaks, for only one alignment dialect can be used by a character (cf. CHARACTER CLASSES, The Assassin). If a character changes alignment, the previously known language is no longer able to be spoken by him or her.

In addition to the above, druids (q.v.) have their own special tongue, and thieves have their secret speech, the Thieves’ Cant.

Therefore, a character will speak at least two languages — common and alignment. He or she might also be able to converse in the special patois of druids or thieves. Semi-human and non-human characters are able to speak racial tongues as well. (See CHARACTER RACES.) In most campaigns, it is likely that open alignment speech will be frowned upon as a serious breach of social etiquette.

A character can learn additional languages. Even the rather slow (80 I.Q.) can learn one additional language. However, his vocabulary, usage, and ability to translate must, perforce, be limited. The very bright can learn five, six, or even seven. (For details of the number of tongues which can be learned see CHARACTER ABILITIES, Intelligence.) Here is how a new language is learned:

The character must find a person (human, semi-human, or non-human) or talking creature who speaks the language which is to be learned. The character must then be in close proximity to his or her instructor for up to one year, and prior to that period the language can be learned one month early for each point of intelligence above 12. Thus, a character with 13 intelligence learns the new language in 11 months, 14 intelligence learns in 10 months, all the way to 18 intelligence which requires but six months to learn. Only one new language can be studied at any given time.

Which languages are knowable in a campaign is strictly up to the DM who runs it. The following list gives some of the languages typically used:

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Dwarvish</td>
    <td>Halfling</td>
    <td>Lizardman</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Elvish</td>
    <td>Hobgoblin</td>
    <td>Ogrish</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Goblin</td>
    <td>Kobold</td>
    <td>Orcish</td>
  </tr>
</table>

34
