# CHARACTER CLASSES

## CHARACTER CLASSES TABLE I: HIT DICE, SPELL ABILITY, AND CLASS LEVEL LIMIT

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Class of Character</th>
      <th>Hit Die Type</th>
      <th>Maximum Number of Hit Dice</th>
      <th>Spell Ability</th>
      <th>Class Level Limit</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>CLERIC</td>
      <td>d8</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>none</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Druid</td>
      <td>d8</td>
      <td>14</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>14 (The Great Druid)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>FIGHTER</td>
      <td>d10</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>no</td>
      <td>none</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Paladin</td>
      <td>d10</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>yes*</td>
      <td>none</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Ranger</td>
      <td>d8 (+d8)**</td>
      <td>10 (+1)**</td>
      <td>yes***</td>
      <td>none</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>MAGIC-USER</td>
      <td>d4</td>
      <td>11</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>none</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Illusionist</td>
      <td>d4</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>none</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>THIEF</td>
      <td>d6</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>no****</td>
      <td>none</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Assassin</td>
      <td>d6</td>
      <td>15</td>
      <td>no****</td>
      <td>14 (Master of Assassins)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>MONK</td>
      <td>d4 (+d4)**</td>
      <td>17 (+1)**</td>
      <td>no</td>
      <td>17 (Grand Master of Flowers)</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

* Clerical spell ability up to 4th level spells, first gained at 9th level.

** The ranger beings with two eight-sided hit dice (2d8), but thereafter goes up one die per level, to the indicated maximum, as do all other classes. The monk begins with two four-sided dice (2d4), and goes up thereafter as do rangers, at one die per level.

*** Druidic spell ability up to 3rd level spells, first gained at 8th level; and magic-user spell ability up to 2nd level, first gained at 9th level.

**** At 10th level (12th level with regard to assassins) thieves gain the ability to read magic-users’ (and illusionists’) spells from scrolls.

---

### Notes Regarding Character Classes Table I.:

Class of Character is self-explanatory. Multi-classes have been omitted, but certain facts pertaining to them are given hereafter.

Hit Dice Type shows the type of die to be rolled by a character of the appropriate class at each level of experience (q.v.) he or she has gained so as to determine how many hit points (q.v.) the character has. Multi-classed characters determine their hit points as follows:

1. Roll the hit die (or dice) appropriate to each class the character is professing.
2. Total the sum of all dice so rolled, and adjust for constitution (q.v.).
3. Divide the total by the character’s classes (two or three), dropping fractions under ½, rounding fractions of ½ or greater upwards to the next whole number.
4. The number derived (quotient) is the number of hit points the multi-classed character gains with the rise in that experience level.

Note that when multi-classed characters are no longer able to progress in any given class, they no longer gain the hit dice for that class. (See CHARACTER HIT POINTS).

Maximum Number of Hit Dice assumes that the character has no racial limitation to prevent rise commensurate with the number of hit dice. Note that additional hit points are still gained with increase in level, even though no additional hit dice can be, in those cases where there is no class (or race) level limit. (See CHARACTER HIT POINTS.)

Spell Ability simply indicates whether or not the class of character is able to employ spells. (For details of spells see CHARACTER SPELLS.)

Class Level Limit tells how high in levels the character can progress in the class in question. As shown, most character classes do not have any upper limit, although racial limitations might affect non-human or semi-human characters.

---

## CHARACTER CLASSES TABLE II.: ARMOR AND WEAPONS PERMITTED

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Class of Character</th>
      <th>Armor</th>
      <th>Shield</th>
      <th>Weapons*</th>
      <th>Oil</th>
      <th>Poison</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>CLERIC</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>club, flail, hammer, mace, staff</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>never**</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Druid</td>
      <td>leather</td>
      <td>wooden</td>
      <td>club, dagger, dart, hammer, scimitar, sling, spear, staff</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>?</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>FIGHTER</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>any***</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>?</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Paladin</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>any***</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>never</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Ranger</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>any***</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>?</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>MAGIC-USER</td>
      <td>none</td>
      <td>none</td>
      <td>dagger, dart, staff</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>?</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Illusionist</td>
      <td>none</td>
      <td>none</td>
      <td>dagger, dart, staff</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>?</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>THIEF</td>
      <td>leather</td>
      <td>none</td>
      <td>club, dagger, dart, sling, sword****</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>?</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Assassin</td>
      <td>leather</td>
      <td>any</td>
      <td>any***</td>
      <td>yes</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>MONK</td>
      <td>none</td>
      <td>none</td>
      <td>bo sticks, club, crossbow, dagger, hand axe, javelin, jo stick, pole arm, spear, staff</td>
      <td>no</td>
      <td>?</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

* This heading includes any magical weapons of the type named unless use by the class in question is specifically proscribed in the description of the magic weapon.

** This prohibition is strictly for clerics who are not of evil alignment; the latter may use poison if permitted in the campaign by the referee.

*** Characters under 5’ height cannot employ the longbow or any weapon over 12’ in length. Those under 100 pounds of body weight cannot use the heavy crossbow or pole arms in excess of 200 gold piece weight equivalent, including two-handed swords.

**** A thief may use a short sword, broad sword, or long sword but not a bastard sword or a two-handed sword.

Note Regarding Poison: The question mark indicates that the use of poisons is possible providing the referee so allows. Uses and limitations are determined by the referee with suggestions from the DUNGEON MASTERS GUIDE.

19
