# CHARACTER CLASSES (DRUID)

Nonetheless, druids serve to strengthen, protect, and revitalize as the usual cleric does. The more powerful druidic spells, as well as their wider range of weaponry, make up for the fact that druids are unable to use any armor or shields other than leather armor and wooden shields (metallic armor spoils their magical powers). They must speak or read spells aloud. Due to their involvement with living, growing things, druids have no power to turn or control undead, demons, or devils.

Druids can be visualized as medieval cousins of what the ancient Celtic sect of Druids would have become had it survived the Roman conquest. They hold trees (particularly oak and ash), the sun, and the moon as deities. Mistletoe is the holy symbol of druids, and it gives power to their spells. They have an obligation to protect trees and wild plants, crops, and to a lesser extent, their human followers and animals. Thus, druids will never destroy woodlands or crops no matter what the circumstances. Even though a woods, for example, were evilly hostile, druids would not destroy it, although nothing would prevent them from changing the nature of the place if the desire and wherewithal existed. In similar fashion, they avoid slaying wild animals or even domestic ones except as necessary for self-preservation and sustenance.

If druids observe any creature destroying their charges, the druids are unlikely to risk their lives to prevent the destruction. Rather, it is probable that the druids will seek retribution and revenge at a later date as opportunity presents itself.

In connection with their nature worship, druids have certain innate powers which are gained at higher level. At 3rd level (Initiate of the 1st Circle), a druid gains the following abilities:

1. Identification of plant type
2. Identification of animal type
3. Identification of pure water
4. Power to pass through overgrown areas (undergrowth of tangled thorns, briar patches, etc.) without leaving a discernible trail and at normal movement rate (q.v.)

At 7th level (Initiate of the 5th Circle), the following additional powers are gained:

1. Immunity from charm spells cast by any creature basically associated with the woodlands, i.e. dryads, nixies, sylphs, etc.
2. Ability to change form up to three times per day, actually becoming, in all respects save the mind, a reptile, bird or mammal.
   A. Each type of creature form can be assumed but once per day.
   B. The size of creature form assumed can vary from as small as a bullfrog, bluejay, or bat to as large as a large snake, an eagle, or a black bear (about double the weight of the druid).
   C. Each assumption of a new form removes from 10% to 60% (d6, multiply by 10) of the hit points of damage, if any, the druid has sustained prior to changing form.

Druids have their own secret language, and all speak it in addition to their other tongues (alignment, common, and others known). Upon becoming a 3rd level druid (Initiate of the 1st Circle), and with each level increase thereafter, a druid gains a language of his choice: centaur, dryad, elvish, faun, gnome, green dragon, hill giant, lizardman, manticore, nixie, pixie, sprite, treantish.

In melee combat, druids fight as clerics, but they do suffer somewhat from their inability to wear protective armor of metal. They likewise make saving throws (q.v.) as clerics, but against fire and lightning (electrical) attacks they get a bonus of +2 on their dice rolls.

Druids can use those magic items not otherwise proscribed which are for all classes and those for regular clerics which are not written, i.e. books and scrolls.

At the upper levels there are only a limited number of characters. At 12th level (Druid) there can be but nine of these nature priests. Each such 12th level druid is the leader of a body of lesser druids and will have an entourage of three of their underlings, i.e. the lowest (in experience) Druid (12th level) will have three Aspirants (1st level) to serve him or her, while the highest (in experience) will have three Initiates of the 7th Circle (9th level). Initiates of the 8th and 9th Circles are under direct supervision of the three Archdruids and The Great Druid respectively.

Above all other druids is a lone figure, The Great Druid. The supreme druid is always attended by nine Initiates of the 9th Circle.

(Note: It is possible that other henchmen and hirelings, as well as worshippers, will be found with any particular druid. All servitors of upper-level druids are faithful protectors. They are not otherwise considered henchmen (q.v.) per se.)

At such time as a druid class player character attains experience points sufficient to advance him or her to Druid (12th level), the corresponding powers are gained only:

1. If there are currently fewer than nine other characters of Druid level, or
2. The player character bests one of the nine Druid level characters in spell or hand-to-hand combat. If the combat is not mortal, the losing combatant drops the exact number of experience points necessary to place him or her in the beginning of the next lower level.

If the player character succeeds, he or she becomes a Druid, with full powers, and the former Druid (assuming case 2, above) becomes an Initiate of the 9th Circle. If the player character loses, he or she remains at lower level and actually has fewer experience points in the bargain.

This process is repeated with respect to a Druid becoming an Archdruid and for an Archdruid becoming the Great Druid. Multiple attempts to move upwards are possible as long as the character survives.

## DRUIDS (CLERICS) TABLE I.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Experience Points</th>
      <th>Experience Level</th>
      <th>8-Sided Dice for Accumulated Hit Points</th>
      <th>Level Title</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>0 — 2,000</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>Aspirant</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>2,001 — 4,000</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>Ovate</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>4,001 — 7,500</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 1st Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>7,501 — 12,500</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 2nd Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>12,501 — 20,000</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 3rd Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>20,001 — 35,000</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 4th Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>35,001 — 60,000</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 5th Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>60,001 — 90,000</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 6th Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>90,001 — 125,000</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 7th Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>125,001 — 200,000</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 8th Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>200,001 — 300,000</td>
      <td>11</td>
      <td>11</td>
      <td>Initiate of the 9th Circle</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>300,001 — 750,000</td>
      <td>12</td>
      <td>12</td>
      <td>Druid</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>750,001 — 1,500,000</td>
      <td>13</td>
      <td>13</td>
      <td>Archdruid</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>1,500,001</td>
      <td>14</td>
      <td>14</td>
      <td>The Great Druid</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


## SPELLS USABLE BY CLASS AND LEVEL — DRUIDS (CLERICS)

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Druidic Level</th>
      <th>1</th>
      <th>2</th>
      <th>3</th>
      <th>4</th>
      <th>5</th>
      <th>6</th>
      <th>7</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>11</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>12</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>13</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>14</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


21
