# CHARACTER RACES (DWARVES)

determination of approximate depth, which can be done at any distance):

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Detect grade or slope in passage, upwards or downwards</td>
    <td>75% probability (d4, score 1-3)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Detect new construction or passage/tunnel</td>
    <td>75% probability</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Detect sliding or shifting walls or rooms</td>
    <td>66 2/3% probability (d6, score 1-4)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Detect traps involving pits, falling blocks and other stonework</td>
    <td>50% probability (d4, score 1-2 or d6, score 1-3)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Determine approximate depth underground</td>
    <td>50% probability</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Note that the dwarven character must be actively seeking to determine the phenomenon in question in order to be able to determine the answer; the information does not simply spring to mind unbidden.

In melee combat (see COMBAT), dwarves add 1 to their dice rolls to hit opponents who are half-orcs, goblins, hobgoblins, or orcs. When being attacked by ogres, trolls, ogre magi, giants, and/or titans, dwarves subtract 4 from their opponents’ “to hit” dice rolls because of the dwarves’ small size and combat ability against these much bigger creatures.

As has already been noted, dwarven characters get a bonus of 1 added to their initial constitution ability, and a penalty of 1 on their charisma score due to racial characteristics. It is very important to note the actual charisma score prior to racial adjustment, however, for dwarven characters do not suffer charisma penalties, nor are they limited to a 16 charisma maximum with regard to their own race. For example, let us suppose a player who has rolled a charisma score of 18 decides to have a dwarven character, thus reducing charisma score by 1 due to racial characteristics. However, the highest score possible for a dwarf is 16 (see CHARACTER ABILITIES, CHARISMA TABLE), so the character’s charisma score is recorded as 16 (18), the parenthetical number being the actual score rolled. With regard to non-dwarven henchmen, the character is limited to a maximum of 8, but with regard to dwarves the character has a score of 18 charisma, so up to 15 henchmen would serve the character if the additional servitors (over and above 8) were themselves dwarves.

## Elves:

There are many sorts of elves, and descriptions of the differing types are found in ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, MONSTER MANUAL. Elven player characters are always considered to be high elves, the most common sort of elf.

A character of elven stock can opt to be a fighter (maximum of 7th level), a magic-user (maximum of 11th level), a thief, or an assassin (maximum of 10th level). An elven character can also be multi-classed, i.e. a fighter/magic-user, a fighter/thief, a magic-user/thief, or a fighter/magic-user/thief. If the character is multi-classed, the following restrictions and strictures apply: Although able to operate freely with the benefits of armor, weapons, and magical items available to the classes the character is operating in, any thieving is restricted to the armor and weaponry usable by the thief class. All earned experience is always divided equally among the classes of the character, even though the character is no longer able to gain levels in one or more of the classes. (More detailed information is given in the CHARACTER CLASSES section hereafter.)

Elven characters have a 90% resistance to sleep and charm spells (if these spells are cast upon them a percentile dice roll of 91% or better is required to allow the magic any chance of having an effect, and even then the saving throw against spells is allowed versus the charm spell).

When employing either a bow of any sort other than a crossbow, or a short or long sword, elven characters gain a bonus of +1 on their die rolls “to hit”.

All elven characters are able to speak the following languages in addition to that of their chosen alignment: elvish, gnome, halfling, goblin, hobgoblin, orcish, gnoll, and the “common tongue” of mankind. Elven

# CHARACTER RACES (GNOMES)

characters of above 15 intelligence are able to learn one additional language for every point of intelligence over 15, i.e. a character with an 18 intelligence score could learn three additional languages (q.v.).

Elves have the ability to see into the infra-red spectrum, so they are able to see up to 60’ in darkness, noting varying degrees of heat radiation.

Secret or concealed doors are difficult to hide from elves. Merely passing within 10’ of the latter makes an elven character 16 2/3% (1 in 6) likely to notice it. It actively searching for such doors, elven characters are 33 1/3% (2 in 6) likely to find a secret door and 50% likely (3 in 6) to discover a concealed portal.

As has been shown previously, elven characters add a bonus of +1 to their initial dexterity score. Likewise, as elves are not as sturdy as humans, they deduct 1 from their initial constitution score.

If alone and not in metal armor (or if well in advance — 90’ or more — of a party which does not consist entirely of elves and/or halflings) an elven character moves so silently that he or she will surprise (q.v.) monsters 66 2/3% (d6, 1 through 4) of the time unless some portal must be opened in order to confront the monster. In the latter case the chance for surprise drops to 33 1/3% (d6, 1-2).

## Gnomes:

A gnome’s preferred habitation is an area of rolling, rocky hills, well-wooded and uninhabited by humans. Details of the race are found in ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, MONSTER MANUAL.

A character of the gnome race can select to be a fighter (maximum of 6th level), an illusionist (maximum of 7th level), a thief, or an assassin (maximum of 8th level). It is also possible for a gnome character to be two classes at the same time (a fighter/illusionist, a fighter/thief, or an illusionist/thief, for example). In the latter case, the character is restricted to the wearing of leather armor, regardless of which class combination he or she has chosen, unless only fighting is performed by the character. As with any such multi-class character, gnomes with two character classes must always divide earned experience equally between levels, even though it might no longer be possible to advance upwards in level in one of the classes. (See CHARACTER CLASSES for more information regarding this subject.)

Similar to their cousins, the dwarves, gnomes are highly magic resistant. A gnome player character gains a bonus of +1 for every 3½ points of constitution ability score, just as dwarven characters do. A constitution of 4 gains a +1, 7 gains a +2, 11 gains a +3, 14 gains a +4, and 18 gains a +5 bonus to saving throws versus magic wands, staves, rods, and spells.

Gnome characters are able to speak the following languages in addition to their alignment language (q.v.) and the “common tongue” of humanity: dwarvish, gnome, halfling, goblin, kobold, and they can also communicate with any burrowing mammal (such as moles, badgers, ground squirrels, etc.). Gnomes are unable to learn more than two languages in addition to those noted above, regardless of how high their intelligence score is.

Gnomes have infravision, the ability to see into the infra-red spectrum, so a gnome character is able to see up to 60’ in the dark, noting varying heat radiation.

Being miners of exceptional merit, gnomes are able to detect the following facts when within 10’ of the area to be examined, or at any time with respect to determination of their approximate depth underground:

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Detect grade or slope in passage upwards or downwards</td>
    <td>80% probability (d10, score 1-8)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Detect unsafe walls, ceilings, or floors</td>
    <td>70% probability (d10, score 1-7)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Determine approximate depth underground</td>
    <td>60% probability (d10, score 1-6)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Determine direction of travel underground</td>
    <td>50% probability (dANY, score any half)</td>
  </tr>
</table>

It is important to note that the gnome must be actively seeking to

16
