# CHARACTER ABILITIES

## CHARACTER ABILITIES

Each and every character has six principal characteristics, the character’s abilities. These abilities are strength, intelligence, wisdom, dexterity, constitution, and charisma. (See also APPENDIX I, Psionic Ability.) The range of these abilities is between 3 and 18. The premise of the game is that each player character is above average — at least in some respects — and has superior potential. Furthermore, it is usually essential to the character’s survival to be exceptional (with a rating of 15 or above) in no fewer than two ability characteristics. Each ability score is determined by random number generation. The referee has several methods of how this random number generation should be accomplished suggested to him or her in the DUNGEON MASTERS GUIDE. The Dungeon Master will inform you as to which method you may use to determine your character’s abilities. The principal abilities are detailed as follows:

**Strength**: Strength is a measure of muscle, endurance, and stamina combined. For purposes of relating this ability to some reality, assume that a character with a strength of 3 is able to lift a maximum of 30 pounds weight above his or her head in a military press, while a character with 18 strength will be able to press 180 pounds in the same manner. Strength is the forte of fighters, for they must be physically powerful in order to wear armor and wield heavy weapons. Therefore, strength is the major characteristic (or prime requisite) of fighters, and those fighters with strength of 16 or more gain a bonus of 10% of earned experience (explained later). Furthermore, fighters with an 18 strength are entitled to roll percentile dice in order to generate a random number between 01 and 00 (100) to determine exceptional strength; exceptional strength increases hit probability and damage done when attacking, and it also increases the weight the character is able to carry without penalty for encumbrance, as well as increasing the character’s ability to force open doors and similar portals. The tables below give complete information regarding the effects of strength. Note that only fighters are permitted to roll on the exceptional strength section of STRENGTH TABLE II: ABILITY ADJUSTMENTS.

## STRENGTH TABLE II.: ABILITY ADJUSTMENTS

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Ability Score</th>
      <th>Hit Probability</th>
      <th>Damage Adjustment</th>
      <th>Weight Allowance</th>
      <th>Open Doors On A</th>
      <th>Bend Bars/Lift Gates</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><td>3</td><td>-3</td><td>-1</td><td>-350</td><td>1</td><td>0%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>4-5</td><td>-2</td><td>-1</td><td>-250</td><td>1</td><td>0%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>6-7</td><td>-1</td><td>none</td><td>-150</td><td>1</td><td>0%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>8-9</td><td>normal</td><td>none</td><td>normal</td><td>1-2</td><td>1%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>10-11</td><td>normal</td><td>none</td><td>normal</td><td>1-2</td><td>2%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>12-13</td><td>normal</td><td>none</td><td>+100</td><td>1-2</td><td>4%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>14-15</td><td>normal</td><td>none</td><td>+200</td><td>1-2</td><td>7%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>16</td><td>normal</td><td>+1</td><td>+350</td><td>1-3</td><td>10%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>17</td><td>+1</td><td>+1</td><td>+500</td><td>1-3</td><td>13%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18</td><td>+1</td><td>+2</td><td>+750</td><td>1-3</td><td>16%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/01-50</td><td>+1</td><td>+3</td><td>+1,000</td><td>1-3</td><td>20%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/51-75</td><td>+2</td><td>+3</td><td>+1,250</td><td>1-4</td><td>25%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/76-90</td><td>+2</td><td>+4</td><td>+1,500</td><td>1-4</td><td>30%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/91-99</td><td>+2</td><td>+5</td><td>+2,000</td><td>1-4 (1)*</td><td>35%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/00</td><td>+3</td><td>+6</td><td>+3,000</td><td>1-5 (2)*</td><td>40%</td></tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

*The number in parentheses is the number of chances out of six for the fighter to be able to force open a locked, barred, magically held, or wizard locked door, but only one attempt ever (per door) may be made, and if it fails no further attempts can succeed.

### Notes Regarding Strength Table II:

**Hit Probability** adjustments refer to the score generated by dice roll in melee combat. Subtraction from or addition to the number rolled is made according to the table as applicable. (A full listing of combat tables appears in the DUNGEON MASTERS GUIDE.)

**Damage Adjustment** likewise applies to melee combat. The damage done by scoring a successful hit on an opponent is adjusted downwards or upwards as applicable. Thus, if a hit would normally score 1-6 points of damage upon the opponent, and the character’s strength was only 3, the actual damage done would be reduced by 1 point; but, on the other hand, if the attacker had strength of 18/00, the actual damage done would be adjusted upwards by 6 hit points, and possible damage would jump from 1-6 to 7-12.

**Weight Allowance** is given in number of gold pieces over and above the maximum normally stated for unencumbered movement. (See MOVEMENT.) The conversion ratio of gold pieces to pounds of weight is 10 to 1. If a character could normally carry 500 gold pieces without encumbrance, but the character had strength of 17 instead of the normal 8-11 range, 1,000 gold pieces could be carried without incurring movement penalty.

**Open Doors** indicates the number of chances out of 6 which the character has of opening a stuck or heavy door on that try. Successive attempts may be made at no penalty with regard to damage to the character attempting to force the door open, but each such attempt requires time and makes considerable noise.

**Bend Bars/Lift Gates** states the percentage chance the character has of bending normal soft iron bars or of lifting a vertically moving gate (such as a small portcullis barring a passage). The attempt may be made but once, and if the score required is not made, the character will never succeed in the task. Example: A character with 16 strength is trapped in a dead end passage by a set of iron bars which drop down from the ceiling when a stone slab is stepped on and triggers the release of the gate. The character first attempts to lift the gate, a roll of 01-10 indicating success, but the percentile dice come up 74, so failure is indicated. The character next attempts to bend the bars in order to squeeze between them, the percentage chance of success is the same as for lifting the gate, and this time a 07 is rolled, so the character slips out and is free.

## STRENGTH TABLE I.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Ability Score</th>
      <th>General Information</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><td>3</td><td></td></tr>
    <tr><td>4</td><td></td></tr>
    <tr><td>5</td><td>Here or lower the character can only be a magic-user</td></tr>
    <tr><td>6</td><td>Minimum strength for a gnome, half-orc or halfling character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>7</td><td></td></tr>
    <tr><td>8</td><td>Minimum strength for a dwarf character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>9</td><td>Minimum strength for a fighter character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>10</td><td></td></tr>
    <tr><td>11</td><td></td></tr>
    <tr><td>12</td><td>Minimum strength for an assassin or paladin character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>13</td><td>Minimum strength for a ranger character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>14</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a female halfling character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>15</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a female gnome character, minimum strength for a monk character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>16</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a female elf character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>17</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a female dwarf or female half-elf or male halfling character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18</td><td>Maximum strength possible for all non-fighter characters</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/01-50</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a female human or male gnome character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/51-75</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a male elf or female half-orc character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/76-90</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a male half-elf character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/91-99</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a male dwarf or male half-orc character</td></tr>
    <tr><td>18/00</td><td>Maximum human strength</td></tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

CHARACTER ABILITIES (STRENGTH)

9
