# Other Fantasy and Science Fiction Titles from TSR

## The Advanced Dungeons & Dragons™ Game Family

**PLAYERS HANDBOOK.** This hardbound volume contains everything the player needs to know in AD&D. It contains complete information on characters, experience levels, equipment, spells, and more.

**DUNGEON MASTERS GUIDE.** This hardbound masterwork contains all the invaluable charts and information necessary to be a Dungeon Master. It contains in addition, guidelines for developing the campaign and for running the AD&D game more smoothly.

**MONSTER MANUAL.** A hardbound compendium of the creatures inhabiting the AD&D fantasy world. Over 350 descriptions of monsters, from Aerial Servant to Zombie, profusely illustrated.

**DEITIES & DEMIGODS™** Cyclopedia of Gods and Heroes from Myths and Legends. This hardbound tome contains deities from over a dozen mythologies and their worship converted to AD&D terms for using in fleshing out a Dungeon Master’s world, and is profusely illustrated.

**THE WORLD OF GREYHAWK™** Fantasy World Setting. This work provides a complete campaign world in which to base adventures and characters, place dungeons, etc. Two large full-color maps, a folder, and a 32-page booklet full of ready-made historical and geographical information. Approved for use with AD&D.

**DUNGEON MASTERS SCREEN.** Actually two reference screens, one for normal combat, and saving throws and another for psionic combat and other oft-needed information. With full color illustrations.

**PLAYER CHARACTER RECORD SHEETS**

**PERMANENT CHARACTER FOLDER AND ADVENTURE RECORD SHEETS**

**NON-PLAYER CHARACTER RECORD SHEETS**

These three products are designed for various types of character record keeping, and are made for the convenience of player and Dungeon Master alike. All are three-hole drilled for easy notebook storage.

**THE ROGUES GALLERY.** An aid for the harried Dungeon Master this booklet contains hundreds of ready-made non-player characters, as well as caravans, bandit groups, dungeon parties, and more.

**DUNGEON MASTERS ADVENTURE LOG.** This record sheet is for the Dungeon Master. It organizes all the important information the Dungeon Master needs to know about the player characters participating in an adventure, and doubles as a log of events and encounters that the players have during the course of an adventure.

## MODULES

Every AD&D module is a ready-to-play adventure setting, populated with appropriate monsters, treasures, tricks, and traps, and including maps, background information, and histories. Though each individual module is designed to stand on its own, several series are specially made to form a connected progression of adventures.

- G1: STEADING OF THE HILL GIANT CHIEF
- G2: GLACIAL RIFT OF THE FROST GIANT JARL
- G3: HALL OF THE FIRE GIANT KING

- D1: DESCENT INTO THE DEPTHS OF THE EARTH
- D2: SHRINE OF THE KUO-TOA
- D3: VAULT OF THE DROW

- S1: TOMB OF HORRORS
- S2: WHITE PLUME MOUNTAIN
- S3: EXPEDITION TO THE BARRIER PEAKS

- T1: VILLAGE OF HOMMLET

- C1: HIDDEN SHRINE OF TAMOACHAN
- C2: GHOST TOWER OF INVERNESS

- Q1: QUEEN OF THE DEMONWEB PITS

- A1: SLAVE PITS OF THE UNDERCITY
- A2: SECRET OF THE SLAVERS’ STOCKADE
- A3: ASSAULT ON THE AERIE OF THE SLAVE LORDS
- A4: IN THE DUNGEON OF THE SLAVE LORDS

## The Dungeons & Dragons® Game Family

**BASIC DUNGEONS & DRAGONS®, COMPLETE BASIC GAME SET.** Everything needed to begin playing D&D® Adventure Game: Basic Game Book, Polyhedra Dragon Dice Set, and an Introductory Module “Keep on the Borderlands” — especially designed for beginning players and Dungeon Masters. All in a beautifully illustrated full color box.

**BASIC DUNGEONS & DRAGONS®, Basic Game Book only.**

## INTRODUCTORY MODULES

Each of these modules is especially designed to instruct both the beginning player and Dungeon Master; how to construct and fill one’s own dungeons and how to better play D&D for full enjoyment.

127
