# CHARACTER CLASSES (DRUID)

Druids as a class do not dwell permanently in castles, or even in cities or towns. All druids prefer to live in sacred groves, dwelling in sod, log, or stone buildings of smallish size. When attaining levels above the 11th, characters will generally inhabit building complexes set in woodlands and similar natural surroundings.

## The Fighter

The principal attribute of a fighter is strength. To become a fighter, a character must have a minimum strength of 9 and a constitution of 7 or greater. A good dexterity rating is also highly desirable. If a fighter has strength above 15, he or she adds 10% to experience points awarded by the Dungeon Master. Also, high strength gives the fighter a better chance to hit an opponent and causes an increased amount of damage.

Fighters have a ten-sided die (d10) for determination of their hit points per level. No other class of character (save the paladin and ranger (qq.v.) sub-classes of fighters) is so strong in this regard. Fighters are the strongest of characters in regards to sheer physical strength, and they are the best at hand-to-hand combat. Any sort of armor or weapon is usable by fighters. Fighters may be of any alignment — good or evil, lawful or chaotic, or neutral.

Although fighters do not have magic spells to use, their armor and weapons can compensate. They have the most advantageous combat table and generally have good saving throw (q.v.) possibilities as well.

Fighters can employ many magical items, including potions; “protection” scrolls; many rings; a few wands; one rod; many other magic items; and all forms of armor, shields and weapons.

When a fighter attains 9th level (Lord), he or she may opt to establish a freehold. This is done by building some type of castle and clearing the area in a radius of 20 to 50 miles around the stronghold, making it free from all sorts of hostile creatures. Whenever such a freehold is established and cleared, the fighter will:

1. Automatically attract a body of men-at-arms led by an above-average fighter. These men will serve as mercenaries so long as the fighter maintains his or her freehold and pays the men-at-arms; and

2. Collect a monthly revenue of 7 silver pieces for each and every inhabitant of the freehold due to trade, tariffs, and taxes.

### FIGHTERS TABLE

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Experience Points</th>
      <th>Experience Level</th>
      <th>10-Sided Dice for Accumulated Hit Points</th>
      <th>Level Title</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>0—2,000</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>Veteran</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>2,001—4,000</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>Warrior</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>4,001—8,000</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>Swordsman</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>8,001—18,000</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>Hero</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>18,001—35,000</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>Swashbuckler</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>35,001—70,000</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>Myrmidon</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>70,001—125,000</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>Champion</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>125,001—250,000</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>Superhero</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>250,001—500,000</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>Lord</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>500,001—750,000</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>9+3</td>
      <td>Lord (10th Level)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>750,001—1,000,000</td>
      <td>11</td>
      <td>9+6</td>
      <td>Lord (11th Level)</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

250,000 experience points per level for each additional level beyond the 11th.

Fighters gain 3 h.p. per level after the 9th.

## The Paladin

A paladin character is a fighter sub-class, but unlike normal fighters, all paladins must begin as lawful good in alignment (q.v.) and always remain lawful good or absolutely lose all of the special powers which are given to them. They have both fighting abilities and limited spell powers (at high level). To become a paladin a character must be human, have a strength of not less than 12, a minimum intelligence of 9, a wisdom of 13 or more, a minimum constitution of 9, and not less than 17 charisma. If a paladin has both strength and wisdom in excess of 15, he or she gains the benefit of adding 10% to the experience points awarded by the Dungeon Master.

Law and good deeds are the meat and drink of paladins. If they ever knowingly perform an act which is chaotic in nature, they must seek a high level (7th or above) cleric of lawful good alignment, confess their sin, and do penance as prescribed by the cleric. If a paladin should ever knowingly and willingly perform an evil act, he or she loses the status of paladinhood immediately and irrevocably. All benefits are then lost, and no deed or magic can restore the character to paladinhood; he or she is everafter a fighter.

The benefits of a paladin are:

1. Detect evil at up to 60’ distance, as often as desired, but only when the paladin is concentrating on determining the presence of evil and seeking to detect it in the right general direction.

2. Make all saving throws (q.v.) at +2 on the dice.

3. Immunity to all forms of disease.

4. The ability to “lay on hands”, either on others, or on his or her own person, to cure wounds; this heals 2 hit points of damage per level of experience the paladin has attained, but laying on hands can be performed but once per day.

5. The ability to cure disease of any sort; this can be done once per week for each five levels of experience the paladin has attained, i.e. at levels 1 through 5 one disease per week, at levels 6 through 10 two diseases, at levels 11 through 15 three diseases, etc.

6. The continuing emanation of a protection from evil (see CHARACTER SPELLS) in a 1” radius round the paladin.

Furthermore:

7. At 3rd level, the paladin gains the power to affect undead and devils and demons as if he or she were a 1st level cleric, and this power goes upwards with each level of experience the paladin gains; so at 4th level the effect is that of a 2nd level cleric, at 5th it is that of a 3rd level cleric, etc. (See The Cleric above.)

8. At 4th level — or at any time thereafter — the paladin may call for his warhorse; this creature is an intelligent heavy warhorse, with 5 +5 hit dice (5d8 plus 5 hit points), AC 5, and the speed of a medium warhorse (18”); it will magically appear, but only one such animal is available every ten years, so that if the first is lost the paladin must wait until the end of the period for another.

9. If a paladin has a “Holy Sword” (a special Magic Sword which your referee is aware of and will explain to you if the need arises), he or she projects a circle of power 1” in diameter when the Holy Sword is unsheathed and held; and this power dispels magic (see CHARACTER SPELLS, dispel magic) at the level of magic use equal to the experience level of the paladin.

10. At 9th level (through 20th level) of experience, paladins gain the ability to employ cleric spells (q.v.). They may never use scrolls of spells, however, except those normally usable by fighters.

The following strictures apply to paladins:

1. They may never retain more than ten magic items; these may never exceed:

   - armor, 1 (suit)
   - shield, 1
   - weapons*, 4
   - any other magic items, 4

   *these include daggers, swords, etc.; and such items as magic bows and magic arrows are considered as but 1 weapon

22
