# MAGIC-USER SPELLS (7TH LEVEL)

protection (or a thaumaturgic triangle with protection from evil) and the demon confined within a pentagram (circled pentacle) if he or she is to avoid being slain or carried off by the summoned cacodemon. The summoned demon can be treated with as follows:

1) The magic-user can require the monster to perform a desired course of action by force of threat and pain of a spiritwrack spell (q.v.), allowing freedom whenever the demon performs the full extent of the service, and forcing the demon to pledge word upon it. This is exceedingly dangerous, as a minor error in such a bargain will be seized upon by the monster to reverse the desired outcome or simply to kill and devour the summoner. Furthermore, the demon will bear great enmity for the magic-user forever after such forced obedience, so the spell caster had better be most powerful and capable.

2) By tribute of fresh human blood and the promise of 1 or more human sacrifices, the summoner can bargain with the demon for willing service. Again, the spell caster is well advised to have ample protection and power to defend himself or herself, as the demon might decide the offer is insufficient — or it is easier to enjoy the summoner’s slow death — and decide not to accept the bargain as offered. Although the demon will have to abide by a pledge, as his name is known, he will have to hold only to the exact word of the arrangement, not to the spirit of the agreement. On the other hand, only highly evil magic-users are likely to attempt to strike such a bargain, and the summoned cacodemon might be favorably disposed towards such a character, especially if he or she is also chaotic.

3) The summoned demon can be the object of a trap the soul spell (q.v.). In this case, the magic-user will not speak with or bargain for the demon’s services, although the cacodemon might be eager to reach an accord with the dweomercrafter before he is forced into imprisonment. The trapping of the demon is risky only if proper precautions have not been taken, for failure to confine the monster usually means only that it is able to escape to its own plane. Once trapped, the demon must remain imprisoned until the possessor of his object of confinement breaks it and frees him, and this requires one service from the now loosed monster. If the individual(s) freeing the demon fails to demand a service when the monster asks what is required of him, the demon is under no constraint not to slay the liberator(s) on the spot, but if a service is required, the creature must first do his best to perform it and then return to the Abyss.

The duration of service of any demon must be limited unless the demon is willing to serve for an extended period. Any required course of action or service which effectively requires an inordinate period of time to perform, or is impossible to perform, is 50% likely to free the demon from his obligations and enable him to be unconstrained in his vengeance upon the spell caster if he or she is not thereafter continually protected, for a demon so freed can remain on the plane it was summoned to for as long as 666 days.

The demon summoned will be exceptionally strong, i.e. 8 hit points per hit die.

Casting time is 1 hour per type (numeric) of the demon to be summoned. If there is any interruption during this period, the spell fails. If there is an interruption while the cacodemon is summoned, it is 10% probable that it will be able to escape its boundaries and attack the magic-user, this percentage rising cumulatively each round of continued interruption.

Each demon is entitled to a saving throw versus this summoning spell. If a score higher than the level of the magic-user summoning is rolled with 3d6 (2d10 with respect to type VI demons), that particular spell failed to bring the desired demon. When this occurs, it is certain that the named demon is imprisoned or destroyed or the name used was not perfectly correct, so the spell caster will have to call upon another name to bring forth a cacodemon.

The components of this spell are 5 flaming black candles; a brazier of hot coals upon which must be burned sulphur, bat hairs, lard, soot, mercuric-nitric acid crystals, mandrake root, alcohol, and a piece of parchment with the demon’s name inscribed in runes inside a pentacle; and a dish of blood from some mammal (preferably a human, of course) placed inside the area where the cacodemon is to be held.

---

# MAGIC-USER SPELLS (7TH LEVEL)

## Charm Plants (Enchantment/Charm)

Level: 7  
Range: 3"  
Duration: Permanent  
Area of Effect: Special  

Components: V, S, M  
Casting Time: 1 turn  
Saving Throw: Neg.

**Explanation/Description:** The charm plants spell allows the spell caster to bring under command vegetable life forms, communicate with them, and these plants will obey instructions to the best of their ability. The spell will charm plants in a 3" × 1" area. While the spell does not endow the vegetation with new abilities, it does allow the magic-user to command the plants to use whatever they have in order to fulfill his or her instructions, and if the plants in the area of effect do have special or unusual abilities, these will be used as commanded by the magic-user. The saving throw applies only to intelligent plants, and it is made at -4 on the die roll. The material components of the spell are a pinch of humus, a drop of water and a twig or leaf.

## Delayed Blast Fire Ball (Evocation)

Level: 7  
Range: 10" + 1"/level  
Duration: Special  
Area of Effect: 2" radius globe  

Components: V, S, M  
Casting Time: 7 segments  
Saving Throw: ½

**Explanation/Description:** This spell creates a fire ball with +1 on each of its dice of damage, and it will not release its blast for from 1 to 50 segments (1/10 to 5 rounds), according to the command upon casting by the magic-user. In other respects, the spell is the same as the third level fire ball spell (q.v.).

## Drawmij’s Instant Summons (Conjunction/Summoning)

Level: 7  
Range: Infinite + special  
Duration: Instantaneous  
Area of Effect: One small object  

Components: V, S, M  
Casting Time: 1 segment  
Saving Throw: None

**Explanation/Description:** When this spell is cast, the magic-user teleports some desired item from virtually any location directly to his or her hand. The object must be singular, can be no larger than a sword is long, have no more mass and weight than a shield (about 75 g.p. weight), and it must be non-living. To prepare this spell, the magic-user must hold a gem of not less than 5,000 g.p. value in his or her hand and utter all but the final word of the conjuration. He or she then must have this same gem available to cast the spell. All that is then required is that the magic-user utter the final word while crushing the gem, and the desired item is transported instantly into the spell caster’s right or left hand as he or she desires. The item must, of course, have been previously touched during the initial incantation and specifically named, and only that particular item will be summoned by the spell. If the item is in the possession of another creature, the spell will not work, but the caster will know who the possessor is and roughly where he, she, or it is located when the summons is cast. Items can be summoned from other planes of existence, but only if such items are not in the possession (not necessarily physical grasp) of another creature. For each level of experience above the 14th, the magic-user is able to summon a desired item from 1 plane further removed from the plane he or she is upon at the time the spell is cast, i.e. 1 plane at 14th level, but 2 at 15th, 3 at 16th, etc. Thus, a magic-user of 16th level could effect the spell even if the item desired was on the second layer of one of the outer planes, but at 14th level the magic-user would be able to summon the item only if it were on one of the Elemental Planes or the Astral or the Ethereal Plane.

## Duo-Dimension (Alteration)

Level: 7  
Range: 0  
Duration: 3 rounds + 1 round/level  
Area of Effect: Personal  

Components: V, S, M  
Casting Time: 7 segments  
Saving Throw: None

**Explanation/Description:** A duo-dimension spell causes the caster to have only two dimensions, height and width but no depth. He or she is thus invisible when a sideways turn is made, and this invisibility can only be detected by means of a true seeing spell or similar means. In addition, the duo-dimensional magic-user can pass through the thinnest of spaces as long as they have the proper height according to his or her actual length —

87
