# TRAPS, TRICKS, AND ENCOUNTERS

discussed), as well as initiative, communication, negotiation, and/or combat. These aspects of adventuring, as well as damage, healing, saving throws, obedience, and morale must now be considered.

## INITIATIVE

The initiative factor affects who can do what and when during the course of an encounter of any sort. Surprise, already covered heretofore, obviates the need for initiative checks, as the surprising party has complete freedom of action for a time. However, surprise eventually wanes, and then, just as in other circumstances, the relative weight of action must be determined. Initiative allows one group, the party or the monster(s), to begin some course of action prior to the other group.

Actions affected by initiative are many and include slamming a door, fleeing, moving to grapple or melee, a call for a truce or surrender, firing wands, discharging missiles, beginning a spell, and so on.

The initiative check is typically made with 2 six-sided dice, 1d6 for the party, and another of a different size or color for the creatures encountered. This check is made each round of play where first action is a factor. Because a round is a full minute long, dexterity seldom is a factor in the determination of which side acts first. However, if one group is slowed or hasted, or one or more members of the group are, the initiative will always go to the non-slowed or hasted side. In most other cases, the group with the higher die score will always act first. For effects of initiative in fighting, see COMBAT hereafter.

## COMMUNICATION

In order to determine the intent of a possibly friendly or neutral monster or to pass along your intentions or desires, some form of communication is necessary. Speech might do for human-types, as the common tongue is known by most. But what of an encounter with a giant, blink dogs, or dozens of similar creatures? An open and raised right hand is possible, and simply refraining from hostile moves will possibly allow for further exchange. Remember though, that you cannot bribe a band of agres to allow you to pass through unless you can communicate clearly.

## NEGOTIATION

Most DMs love communication and negotiations, for this allows them to assume an active role in actual play. Your referee will assume the persona proper to the creature your party is dealing with — be it shy and hostile, stupid, greedy, helpful, misinformed, or whatever. Intelligent monsters will always balance the offer versus the expectation. A lone ogre is likely, even with his rather dim wit, to recognize that a strong party will kill him if he attacks or demands too much, so a small bribe is better than a risky combat to get flesh to eat and pretty baubles to have. On the other hand, weakness will be exploited by any basically hostile monster unless it seems certain that more can be gained by other action. Be resigned to pay amounts in excess of the actual value received. As a player, you must earn what you gain. Negotiation usually gives you a chance to get on with the earning process, or live to come back and fight another day. Always be wary and use your wits, look at all facets of the situation, and then use your best judgment accordingly. In many cases a payment, bribe, toll, share or ransom fee will enable success or survival, and negotiation is a useful tool to the expert adventurer.

## COMBAT

This broad heading covers all forms of attack and fighting. It includes clerical turning undead, magical control, spell attacks, breath and gaze weapon attacks, magical device attacks, missile discharge, and melee (hand-to-hand combat). Combat occurs when communication and negotiation are undesired or unsuccessful. The clever character does not attack first and ask questions (of self or monster) later, but every adventure will be likely to have combat for him or her at some point.

### Turning Undead:

Clerics are empowered with the ability to turn away undead creatures, as well as certain lesser demons, devils, godlings and paladins through the power of their profession and holy/unholy symbols. The cleric’s level of experience dictates the level of success he or she can expect to achieve in this action. As level of experience increases, the cleric is actually able to destroy undead by the power of his or her religion; or in the case of evil clerics, destroy or command to service such undead if they are of the same

alignment as the cleric, or neutral such as skeletons or zombies. Success also depends on opportunity, of course. The cleric must be in a position to step before the undead, and he or she must have time to speak and hold forth the religious symbol in order to turn (or command) undead, and this of course precludes other spell activity.

### Magical Control:

Magical control is given over certain creatures by means of potions, scrolls, rings and similar magical means. A potion ingested will allow a character a chance to control the actions of a dragon, a scroll read will prevent elements from attacking, a ring will allow its wearer to command mammals. All such actions affect monsters encountered and are part of combat. Opportunity to employ the magical means of control must be available, so surprise, initiative, and melee situations must be considered. A potion cannot be found, opened and swallowed while a giant is beating upon the character with a club. A scroll cannot be read in the whirlwind of an air elemental’s attack. And it is too late to command a hungry weasel not to attack when it is already feasting on prey!

### Spell Combat:

Unless combat is spell versus spell, many such attacks will happen near the end of a melee round. This is because the spell requires a relatively lengthy time to cast, generally longer as spell level increases, so high level spells may take over a full melee round to cast. Furthermore, if the spell caster is struck, grabbed, or magically attacked (and fails to make the requisite saving throw — explained later), the spell will be spoiled and fail. Spell combat includes cleric and magic-user, as well as monster-oriented spells. Curative spells are handled likewise.

### Breath Weapon Attacks:

Some creatures have breath weapons — notably dragons, gorgons, winter wolves, etc. — and some have gaze weapons — notably umber hulks, basilisks, medusae, catoblepas, etc. These attack forms will affect those in the area of breath effect or those upon whom the gaze falls. Precautions can be taken to avoid or minimize breath and gaze weapons’ effects. Most allow the victim a saving throw which will reduce or negate the weapon effect if successful. These attack forms are speedy, and they will usually be unpreventable if the creature which generates them is alive when its action during a melee round occurs.

### Magical Device Attacks:

Magical device attacks include rods, staves, wands, some rings, and a few other miscellaneous items. These devices are similar to breath and gaze attacks in that their area of effect is usually large and affects multiple creatures, saving throws apply, and the attack is quickly accomplished by pointing the device and discharging it.

### Missile Discharge:

This aspect of combat includes catapult missiles, giant-hurled rocks, the discharge of spikes from a manticore’s tail, throwing such things as flasks of oil, torches, vials of holy water, bottles of poison, magic weapons (javelins of lightning, fireball missiles from a necklace, etc.), poison spitting, the hurling of axes, hammers, javelins, spears, etc., and shooting sling missiles, arrows, bolts and so forth from slings and bows.

### Melee Combat:

This form of fighting includes the use of hand-held weapons, natural weaponry (claws, horns, teeth, etc.), grappling, and special or magical touch attacks, i.e. poison, petrification, paralysis, energy level loss, etc. As with most other combat forms, the first “blow” will be struck by the side gaining initiative during the round. Surviving opponents will then be allowed their attacks. Note that haste and slow spells will have the effects heretofore mentioned. Fighters able to strike more than once during a round will attack once before opponents not able to do so, regardless of initiative, but if fighter and fighter melee, initiative tells. Position and weapon length will sometimes affect the order of attack in melee combat.

Participants in a melee can opt to attack, parry, fall back, or flee. Attack can be by weapon, bare hands, or grappling. Parrying disallows any return attack that round, but the strength “to hit” bonus is then subtracted from the opponent’s “to hit” dice roll(s), so the character is less likely to be hit. Falling back is a retrograde move facing the opponent(s) and can be used

104

COMBAT
