# DRUID SPELLS (7TH LEVEL)

shrunk by 100. There are a number of ways to thwart or destroy the creatures forming the swarm, all of which methods should be obvious.

## Finger Of Death (Enchantment/Charm)

- **Level**: 7
- **Range**: 6"
- **Duration**: Permanent
- **Area of Effect**: One creature
- **Components**: V, S, M
- **Casting Time**: 5 segments
- **Saving Throw**: Neg.

**Explanation/Description**: The finger of death spell causes the victim’s heart to stop. The druid utters the incantation, points his or her index finger at the creature to be slain, and unless the victim succeeds in making the appropriate saving throw, death occurs. A successful saving throw negates the spell.

## Fire Storm (Evocation) Reversible

- **Level**: 7
- **Range**: 16"
- **Duration**: 1 round
- **Area of Effect**: 2" cube/level, minimum 16 cubic "
- **Components**: V, S, M
- **Casting Time**: 9 segments
- **Saving Throw**: ½

**Explanation/Description**: When a fire storm spell is cast by a druid, a whole area is shot through with sheets of roaring flame which are equal to a wall of fire (q.v.) in effect. Creatures within the area of fire and 1" or less from the edge of the affected area receive 2 to 16 hit points of damage plus additional hit points equal to the number of levels of experience of the druid unless they make a saving throw, in which case they take only one-half damage. The area of effect is equal to 2 cubic " per level of the druid, i.e. a 13th level druid can cast a fire storm which measures 13" by 2" by 1". The height of the storm is 1" or 2"; the balance of its area must be in length and width. The reverse spell, fire quench, smothers double the area of effect of a fire storm with respect to normal fires, and with respect to magical fires it has a 5% chance per level of the caster of extinguishing a magical fire (such as a fire storm) of proportions up to the normal area of effect of the non-reversed spell.

## Reincarnate (Necromantic)

- **Level**: 7
- **Range**: Touch
- **Duration**: Permanent
- **Area of Effect**: Person touched
- **Components**: V, S, M
- **Casting Time**: 1 turn
- **Saving Throw**: None

**Explanation/Description**: Druids have the capability of bringing back the dead in another body if death occurred no more than a week before the casting of the spell. The person reincarnated will recall the majority of his or her former life and form, but the class they have, if any, in their new incarnation might be different indeed. Abilities and speech are likewise often changed. The table below gives the reincarnation possibilities of this spell:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Die Roll</th>
      <th>Incarnation</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><td>01-03</td><td>badger</td></tr>
    <tr><td>04-08</td><td>bear, black</td></tr>
    <tr><td>09-12</td><td>bear, brown</td></tr>
    <tr><td>13-16</td><td>boar, wild</td></tr>
    <tr><td>17-19</td><td>centaur</td></tr>
    <tr><td>20-23</td><td>dryad</td></tr>
    <tr><td>24-28</td><td>eagle</td></tr>
    <tr><td>29-31</td><td>elf</td></tr>
    <tr><td>32-34</td><td>faun</td></tr>
    <tr><td>35-36</td><td>fox</td></tr>
    <tr><td>37-40</td><td>gnome</td></tr>
    <tr><td>41-44</td><td>hawk</td></tr>
    <tr><td>45-58</td><td>human</td></tr>
    <tr><td>59-61</td><td>lynx</td></tr>
    <tr><td>62-64</td><td>owl</td></tr>
    <tr><td>65-68</td><td>pixie</td></tr>
    <tr><td>69-70</td><td>raccoon</td></tr>
    <tr><td>71-75</td><td>stag</td></tr>
    <tr><td>76-80</td><td>wolf</td></tr>
    <tr><td>81-85</td><td>wolverine</td></tr>
    <tr><td>86-00</td><td>use magic-user reincarnation table</td></tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

---

# MAGIC-USER SPELLS (1ST LEVEL)

Any sort of player character can be reincarnated. If an elf, gnome or human is indicated, the character must be created. When the corpse is touched, the new incarnation will appear in the area within 1 to 6 turns. (Cf. sixth level magic-user spell reincarnation.)

## Transmute Metal To Wood (Alteration)

- **Level**: 7
- **Range**: 8"
- **Duration**: Permanent
- **Area of Effect**: One metal object
- **Components**: V, S, M
- **Casting Time**: 9 segments
- **Saving Throw**: Special

**Explanation/Description**: The transmute metal to wood spell allows the druid casting it to change an object from metal to wood. The volume of metal is equal to a maximum weight of 80 gold pieces per level of experience. Magical objects of metal are only 10% likely to be affected by the spell. Note that even a dispel magic spell will not reverse the spell effects. Thus, a metal door changed to wood would be forevermore a wooden door.

---

# MAGIC-USER SPELLS

## Notes Regarding Magic-User Spells:

Magic-users employ a greater variety of material components than do other character classes employing spells, i.e. clerics and druids. Some of the required components will be difficult to find and/or expensive, but alternative spells can always be chosen.

The relatively short casting time for those spells with a material component assumes that the magic-user has decided upon which spell he or she will employ, and the material or materials needed are at hand in the numerous pockets and folds of the magic-user’s garb. If this is not the case, there will be a delay commensurate to the situation. It has been recommended to the referee that actual time relate to the game time in such situations if at all possible. If it takes 6 seconds to decide on which spell to cast, 1 segment of the round is gone. Having to search through a pack to locate some component is as good as wasting 5 segments — 30 seconds.

Substitute materials might be allowed. This is up to your Dungeon Master. It should be noted that such substitution could affect spell range, duration, area of effect, effect, etc.

In general, reversible or multiple application spells require the magic-user to determine which form he or she is memorizing prior to the adventure. Consult your referee in this regard.

---

## First Level Spells:

### Affect Normal Fires (Alteration)

- **Level**: 1
- **Range**: ½"/level
- **Duration**: 1 round/level
- **Area of Effect**: 3' diameter fire
- **Components**: V, S
- **Casting Time**: 1 segment
- **Saving Throw**: None

**Explanation/Description**: This spell enables the magic-user to cause small fires — from as small as a torch or lantern to as large as a normal bonfire of 3' maximum diameter — to reduce in size and light to become match-like or increase in light so as to become as bright as a light spell. Reducing the fire will cut fuel consumption to half normal, and increasing the fire will double consumption. Note that heat output is not altered in either casel

### Burning Hands (Alteration)

- **Level**: 1
- **Range**: 0
- **Duration**: 1 round
- **Area of Effect**: Special
- **Components**: V, S
- **Casting Time**: 1 segment
- **Saving Throw**: None

**Explanation/Description**: When the magic-user casts this spell, jets of searing flame shoot from his or her fingertips. Hands can only be held so

64
