# CHARACTER CLASSES (PALADIN)

2. They will never retain wealth, keeping only sufficient treasures to support themselves in a modest manner, pay henchmen, men-at-arms, and servants, and to construct or maintain a small castle. (Your DM will give details of this as necessary.) Excess is given away, as is the tithe (see 3. below).

3. An immediate tithe (10%) of all income — be it treasure, wages, or whatever — must be given to whatever charitable religious institution (not a clerical player character) of lawful good alignment the paladin selects.

4. Paladins will have henchmen of lawful good alignment and none other; they will associate only with characters and creatures of good alignment; paladins can join a company of adventurers which contains non-evil neutrals only on a single-expedition basis, and only if some end which will further the cause of lawful good is purposed.

5. If possible, paladins will take service or form an alliance with lawful good characters, whether players or not, who are clerics or fighters (of noble status).

Paladins do not attract a body of men-at-arms to service as do regular fighters.

## PALADINS (FIGHTERS) TABLE I.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Experience Points</th>
      <th>Experience Level</th>
      <th>10-Sided Dice for Accumulated Hit Points</th>
      <th>Level Title</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>0—2,750</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>Gallant</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>2,751—5,500</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>Keeper</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>5,501—12,000</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>Protector</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>12,001—24,000</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>Defender</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>24,001—45,000</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>Warder</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>45,001—95,000</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>Guardian</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>95,001—175,000</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>Chevalier</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>175,001—350,000</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>Justiciar</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>350,001—700,000</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>Paladin</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>700,001—1,050,000</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>9+3</td>
      <td>Paladin (10th level)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>1,050,001—1,400,000</td>
      <td>11</td>
      <td>9+6</td>
      <td>Paladin (11th level, etc.)</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

350,000 experience points per level for each additional level above the 11th.

Paladins gain 3 h.p. per level after the 9th.

## SPELLS USABLE BY CLASS AND LEVEL — PALADINS (FIGHTERS)

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Paladin Level</th>
      <th colspan="4">Clerical Spell Level</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th>1</th>
      <th>2</th>
      <th>3</th>
      <th>4</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>11</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>12</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>-</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>13</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>14</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>15</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>16</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>17</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>18</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>19</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>20*</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>3</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

*Maximum spell ability

## The Ranger

Rangers are a sub-class of fighter who are adept at woodcraft, tracking, scouting, and infiltration and spying. All rangers must be of good alignment (q.v.), although they can be lawful, chaotic, or neutral otherwise. A ranger must have strength of not less than 13, intelligence of not less than 13, wisdom of not less than 14, and a 14 or greater constitution. If the ranger has ability scores of greater than 15 in strength, intelligence and wisdom, he or she gains the benefit of adding 10% to experience points awarded by the referee.

---

# CHARACTER CLASSES (RANGER)

Unlike other fighter-types, rangers have eight-sided hit dice (d8) but at first level they get two, rather than but one, hit dice. It should also be noted that rangers get 11 hit dice rather than the 9 of other fighter-types. In addition to considerable prowess as fighters, rangers have druidic and magical spell capabilities when they attain high level; thus, they are very formidable opponents, for they have other abilities and benefits as well:

1. When fighting humanoid-type creatures of the “giant class”, listed hereafter, rangers add 1 hit point for each level of experience they have attained to the points of damage scored when they hit in melee combat. Giant class creatures are: bugbears, ettins, giants, gnolls, goblins, hobgoblins, kobolds, ogres, ogre magi, orcs, and trolls. Example: a 5th level ranger hits a bugbear in melee combat, and the damage done to the opponent will be according to the ranger’s weapon type, modified by strength, and +5 (for his or her experience level) because the opponent is a bugbear — a “giant class” humanoid.

2. Rangers surprise (q.v.) opponents 50% of the time (d6, score 1 through 3) and are themselves surprised only 16⅔% of the time (d6, score 1).

3. Tracking is possible both outdoors and underground in dungeons and like settings:

   a. Underground the ranger must have observed the creature to be tracked within 3 turns (30 minutes) of the commencement of tracking, and the ranger must begin tracking at a place where the creature was observed:

      <table>
        <thead>
          <tr>
            <th>Creature’s Action</th>
            <th>Chance to Track</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>going along normal passage or room</td>
            <td>65%</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>passes through normal door or uses stairs</td>
            <td>55%</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>goes through a trap door</td>
            <td>45%</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>goes up or down a chimney or through concealed door</td>
            <td>35%</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>passes through a secret door</td>
            <td>25%</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

   b. Outdoors there is a base 90% chance of a ranger being able to follow a creature, modified as follows:

      —for each creature above 1 in the party being tracked +02%

      —for every 24 hours which have elapsed between making the track and tracking -10%

      —for each hour of precipitation -25%

4. At 8th level, rangers gain limited druidic spell ability, and additional spells are added through 17th level.

5. At 9th level rangers gain limited magic-user spell ability, as with druidic spell ability. Rangers cannot read druid or magic-user spells from magic scrolls in any event.

6. At 10th level (Ranger Lord), rangers are able to employ all non-written magic items which pertain to clairaudience, clairvoyance, ESP, and telepathy.

7. Also at 10th level, each ranger attracts a body of 2-24 followers. Note that these henchmen once lost, can never be replaced, although mercenaries can be hired, of course. These followers are determined by the DM who then informs the ranger.

The following restrictions and strictures apply to rangers:

1. Any change to non-good alignment immediately strips the ranger of all benefits, and the character becomes a fighter, with eight-sided hit dice, everafter, and can never regain ranger status.

2. Rangers may not hire men-at-arms, servants, aides, or henchmen until they attain 8th or higher level.

3. No more than three rangers may ever operate together at any time.

24
